President of the United States from 1969 to 1974
"Nixon" redirects here. For other uses, see Nixon (disambiguation) and Richard Nixon (disambiguation).
Richard NixonOval Office portrait37th President of the United StatesIn officeJanuary 20, 1969  August 9, 1974Vice President
Spiro Agnew(1969 October 1973)
None(October December 1973)
Gerald Ford(December 1973 1974)
Preceded byLyndon B. JohnsonSucceeded byGerald Ford36th Vice President of the United StatesIn officeJanuary 20, 1953  January 20, 1961PresidentDwight D. EisenhowerPreceded byAlben W. BarkleySucceeded byLyndon B. JohnsonUnited States Senatorfrom CaliforniaIn officeDecember 1, 1950  January 1, 1953Preceded bySheridan DowneySucceeded byThomas KuchelMember of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom California's 12th districtIn officeJanuary 3, 1947  November 30, 1950Preceded byJerry VoorhisSucceeded byPatrick J. Hillings
Personal detailsBornRichard Milhous Nixon(1913-01-09)January 9, 1913Yorba Linda, California, U.S.DiedApril 22, 1994(1994-04-22) (aged 81)New York City, U.S.Resting placeRichard Nixon Presidential Library and MuseumPolitical partyRepublicanSpousePat Ryan
   (m. 1940; died 1993) Children
Tricia
Julie
ParentsFrancis A. Nixon (father)Hannah Milhous (mother)Education
Whittier College (BA)
Duke University (LLB)
OccupationPoliticianlawyerauthorSignatureMilitary serviceBranch/serviceUnited States NavyYears of service
1942 1946 (active)
1946 1966 (inactive)
RankCommanderBattles/wars
World War II
South Pacific Theater[1]
AwardsNavy and Marine Corps Commendation MedalAmerican Campaign MedalAsiatic Pacific Campaign MedalWorld War II Victory MedalArmed Forces Reserve Medal
Richard Nixon's voice
Richard Nixon speaks on Peace in VietnamRecorded November 3, 1969
This article is part of a series aboutRichard Nixon
Birthplace
Electoral history
Depictions
Pre-vice presidency
House of Representatives
1946 election
Senate
1950 election
36th Vice President of the United States
Eisenhower administration
1st inauguration
2nd inauguration
Motorcade attack
Kitchen Debate
Post-vice presidency
1962 California gubernatorial bid
"Last press conference"
37th President of the United States
Presidency
Timeline
Transition
Inaugurations
first
second
Judicial appointments
Appointed federal judges
Supreme Court candidates
Appointment controversies
Policies
Economic
Nixon shock
Foreign
Nixon Doctrine
Vietnamization
Environmental
EPA
Clean Water
NOAA
Legacy of Parks
Cannabis
war on drugs
Native American
First term
End of the draft
Visit to China
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
War on cancer
Philadelphia Plan
Minority Business Enterprise
OSHA
Apollo program
Second term
Paris Peace Accords
decent interval
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
airlift
Mideast Peace Process
Marine Mammal Protection Act
Endangered Species Act
Impeachment process
Watergate scandal
timeline
Tapes
United States v. Nixon
Resignation speech
Pardon
Post-presidency
Nixon interviews
Foundation
Presidential Library and Museum
Center for the National Interest
Bibliography
Six Crises
Death and state funeral
Presidential campaigns
1960 election
primaries
convention
debates
1968
election
primaries
convention
"Bring Us Together"
1972 election
primaries
convention
Vice presidential campaigns
1952
selection
convention
election
1956
convention
election
vte
Richard Milhous Nixon (January 9, 1913  April 22, 1994) was the 37th president of the United States, serving from 1969 to 1974. A member of the Republican Party, he previously served as a representative and senator from California and was the 36th vice president from 1953 to 1961 under President Dwight D. Eisenhower. His five years in the White House saw reduction of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, d tente with the Soviet Union and China, the first crewed Moon landings, and the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Nixon's second term ended early, when he became the only president to resign from office, as a result of the Watergate scandal.
Nixon was born into a poor family of Quakers in a small town in Southern California. He graduated from Duke Law School in 1937, practiced law in California, then moved with his wife Pat to Washington in 1942 to work for the federal government. After active duty in the Naval Reserve during World War II, he was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946. His work on the Alger Hiss case established his reputation as a leading anti-Communist, which elevated him to national prominence, and in 1950, he was elected to the Senate. Nixon was the running mate of Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Republican Party's presidential nominee in the 1952 election, and served for eight years as the vice president. He ran for president in 1960, narrowly lost to John F. Kennedy, then failed again in a 1962 race for governor of California, after which it was widely believed that his political career was over. However, in 1968, he made another run for the presidency and was elected, defeating Hubert Humphrey by less than one percentage point in the popular vote, as well as defeating third party candidate George Wallace.
Nixon ended American involvement in Vietnam combat in 1973 and the military draft in the same year. His visit to China in 1972 eventually led to diplomatic relations between the two nations, and he also then concluded the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union. In step with his conservative beliefs, his administration incrementally transferred power from the federal government to the states. Nixon's domestic policy saw him impose wage and price controls for 90 days, enforce desegregation of Southern schools, establish the Environmental Protection Agency, and begin the War on Cancer. Additionally, his administration pushed for the Controlled Substances Act and began the War on Drugs. He also presided over the Apollo 11 Moon landing, which signaled the end of the Space Race. He was re-elected with a historic electoral landslide in 1972 when he defeated George McGovern.
In his second term, Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses in the Yom Kippur War, a conflict which led to the oil crisis at home. By late 1973, the Nixon administration's involvement in Watergate eroded his support in Congress and the country. On August 9, 1974, facing almost certain impeachment and removal from office, Nixon resigned from the presidency. Afterwards, he was issued a pardon by his successor, Gerald Ford. During nearly 20 years of retirement, Nixon wrote his memoirs and nine other books. He undertook many foreign trips, rehabilitating his image into that of an elder statesman and leading expert on foreign affairs. He suffered a debilitating stroke on April 18, 1994, and died four days later at the age of 81. Surveys of historians and political scientists have ranked Nixon as a below-average president.[2][3][4] However, evaluations of him have proven complex, with the successes of his presidency contrasted against the circumstances of his departure from office.
Early life and education
 Nixon (second from right) makes his newspaper debut in 1916, contributing five cents to a fund for war orphans. His brother Donald is to his right.
Richard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913, in what was then the township precinct of Yorba Linda, California,[5] in a house built by his father, located on his family's lemon ranch.[1][6][7] His parents were Hannah (Milhous) Nixon and Francis A. Nixon. His mother was a Quaker, and his father converted from Methodism to the Quaker faith. Through his mother, Nixon was a descendant of the early English settler Thomas Cornell, who was also an ancestor of Ezra Cornell, the founder of Cornell University, as well as of Jimmy Carter and Bill Gates.[8]
Nixon's upbringing was influenced by Quaker observances of the time such as abstinence from alcohol, dancing, and swearing. Nixon had four brothers: Harold (1909 1933), Donald (1914 1987), Arthur (1918 1925), and Edward (1930 2019).[9] Four of the five Nixon boys were named after kings who had ruled in medieval or legendary Britain; Richard, for example, was named after Richard the Lionheart.[10]
Nixon's early life was marked by hardship, and he later quoted a saying of Eisenhower to describe his boyhood: "We were poor, but the glory of it was we didn't know it".[11] The Nixon family ranch failed in 1922, and the family moved to Whittier, California. In an area with many Quakers, Frank Nixon opened a grocery store and gas station.[12] Richard's younger brother Arthur died in 1925 at the age of seven after a short illness.[13] Richard was twelve years old when a spot was found on his lung, and with a family history of tuberculosis, he was forbidden to play sports. The spot turned out to be scar tissue from an early bout of pneumonia.[14][15]
Primary and secondary education
 Nixon at Whittier High School, 1930
Nixon attended East Whittier Elementary School, where he was president of his eighth-grade class.[16] His older brother Harold had attended Whittier High School, which his parents thought resulted in Harold's dissolute lifestyle, before he contracted tuberculosis (that killed him in 1933). They decided to send Nixon to the larger Fullerton Union High School.[17][18][17][18] Though he had to ride a school bus an hour each way during his freshman year, he received excellent grades. Later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week.[19] He played junior varsity football, and seldom missed a practice, though he rarely was used in games.[20] He had greater success as a debater, winning a number of championships and taking his only formal tutelage in public speaking from Fullerton's Head of English, H. Lynn Sheller. Nixon later mused on Sheller's words, "Remember, speaking is conversation...don't shout at people. Talk to them. Converse with them."[21] Nixon said he tried to use a conversational tone as much as possible.[21]
At the start of his junior year in September 1928, Nixon's parents permitted him to transfer to Whittier High School. At Whittier, Nixon lost a bid for student body president, his first electoral defeat. At this period of his life, he often rose at 4 a.m., to drive the family truck into Los Angeles to purchase vegetables at the market and then drove to the store to wash and display them before going to school. Harold was diagnosed with tuberculosis the previous year; when their mother took him to Arizona hoping to improve his health, the demands on Nixon increased, causing him to give up football. Nevertheless, Nixon graduated from Whittier High third in his class of 207.[22]
College and law school
Nixon was offered a tuition grant to attend Harvard University, but with Harold's continued illness requiring his mother's care, Richard was needed at the store. He remained in his hometown, enrolled at Whittier College in September 1930, and his expenses were met by a bequest from his maternal grandfather.[1][23] Nixon played for the basketball team; he also tried out for football, and though he lacked the size to play, he remained on the team as a substitute and was noted for his enthusiasm.[24] Instead of fraternities and sororities, Whittier had literary societies. Nixon was snubbed by the only one for men, the Franklins, many of whom were from prominent families, unlike Nixon. He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society.[25] In addition to the society, his studies, and work at the store, Nixon found time for extracurricular activities; he became known as a champion debater and hard worker.[26] In 1933, he became engaged to Ola Florence Welch, daughter of the Whittier police chief, but they broke up in 1935.[27]
After graduating summa cum laude with a Bachelor of Arts degree in history from Whittier in 1934, Nixon was accepted at the new Duke University School of Law,[28] which offered scholarships to top students, including Nixon.[29] It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations.[30] The number of scholarships was greatly reduced for second- and third-year students, creating intense competition.[29] Nixon kept his scholarship, was elected president of the Duke Bar Association,[31] inducted into the Order of the Coif,[32] and graduated third in his class in June 1937.[28]
Early career and marriage
 Nixon's family: Julie and David Eisenhower, President Nixon, First Lady Pat Nixon, Tricia and Edward Cox (December 24, 1971)
After graduating from Duke, Nixon initially hoped to join the FBI. He received no response to his letter of application, and learned years later that he had been hired, but his appointment had been canceled at the last minute due to budget cuts.[33] He returned to California, was admitted to the California bar in 1937, and began practicing in Whittier with the law firm Wingert and Bewley.[28] His work concentrated on commercial litigation for local petroleum companies and other corporate matters, as well as on wills.[34] Nixon was reluctant to work on divorce cases, disliking frank sexual talk from women.[35] In 1938, he opened up his own branch of Wingert and Bewley in La Habra, California,[36] and became a full partner in the firm the following year.[37] In later years, Nixon proudly said he was the only modern president to have previously worked as a practicing attorney.[35]
In January 1938 Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of The Dark Tower. There he played opposite a high school teacher named Thelma "Pat" Ryan.[28] Nixon described it in his memoirs as "a case of love at first sight"[38] for Nixon only, as Pat Ryan turned down the young lawyer several times before agreeing to date him.[39] Once they began their courtship, Ryan was reluctant to marry Nixon; they dated for two years before she assented to his proposal. They wed in a small ceremony on June 21, 1940. After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Nixons began their married life in Whittier.[40] They had two daughters, Tricia (born 1946) and Julie (born 1948).[41]
Military service
 Lieutenant Commander Richard Nixon, United States Navy (circa 1945)
In January 1942 the couple moved to Washington, D.C., where Nixon took a job at the Office of Price Administration.[28] In his political campaigns, Nixon suggested that this was his response to Pearl Harbor, but he had sought the position throughout the latter part of 1941. Both Nixon and his wife believed he was limiting his prospects by remaining in Whittier.[42] He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence. He did not enjoy the role, and four months later applied to join the United States Navy.[43] Though he could have claimed an exemption from the draft as a birthright Quaker, or a deferral due to his government service, Nixon nevertheless sought a commission in the Navy. His application was approved, and he was appointed a lieutenant junior grade in the United States Naval Reserve on June 15, 1942.[44][45]
In October 1942, after moving his home of record to Alexandria, Virginia, he was given his first assignment as aide to the commander of the Naval Air Station Ottumwa in Iowa until May 1943.[44][46] Seeking more excitement, he requested sea duty and on July 2, 1943, was assigned to Marine Aircraft Group 25 and the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command (SCAT), supporting the logistics of operations in the South Pacific Theater.[47][48][49] On October 1, 1943, Nixon was promoted to lieutenant.[44] Nixon commanded the SCAT forward detachments at Vella Lavella, Bougainville, and finally at Green Island (Nissan Island).[44][49] His unit prepared manifests and flight plans for R4D/C-47 operations and supervised the loading and unloading of the transport aircraft. For this service, he received a Navy Letter of Commendation (awarded a Navy Commendation Ribbon, which was later updated to the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal) from his commanding officer for "meritorious and efficient performance of duty as Officer in Charge of the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command". Upon his return to the U.S., Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in California. In January 1945 he was transferred to the Bureau of Aeronautics office in Philadelphia to help negotiate the termination of war contracts, and received his second letter of commendation, from the Secretary of the Navy[50] for "meritorious service, tireless effort, and devotion to duty". Later, Nixon was transferred to other offices to work on contracts and finally to Baltimore.[51] On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander.[44][50] On March 10, 1946, he was relieved of active duty.[44] On June 1, 1953, he was promoted to commander in the U.S. Naval Reserve, from which he retired in the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 6, 1966.[44]
U.S. House of Representatives (1947 1950)
See also: 1946 California's 12th congressional district election
 Nixon's congressional campaign flyer
Republicans in California's 12th congressional district were frustrated by their inability to defeat Democratic representative Jerry Voorhis, and they sought a consensus candidate who would run a strong campaign against him. In 1945, they formed a "Committee of 100" to decide on a candidate, hoping to avoid internal dissensions which had led to previous Voorhis victories. After the committee failed to attract higher-profile candidates, Herman Perry, manager of Whittier's Bank of America branch, suggested Nixon, a family friend with whom he had served on the Whittier College Board of Trustees before the war. Perry wrote to Nixon in Baltimore, and after a night of excited conversation with his wife, Nixon gave Perry an enthused response. Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee. When he left the Navy at the start of 1946, Nixon and his wife returned to Whittier, where he began a year of intensive campaigning.[52][53] He contended that Voorhis had been ineffective as a representative and suggested that Voorhis's endorsement by a group linked to Communists meant that Voorhis must have radical views.[54] Nixon won the election, receiving 65,586 votes to Voorhis's 49,994.[55]
 Nixon in Yorba Linda, 1950
In June 1947, Nixon supported the Taft Hartley Act, a federal law that monitors the activities and power of labor unions, and he served on the Education and Labor Committee. In August 1947, he became one of 19 House members to serve on the Herter Committee,[56] which went to Europe to report on the need for U.S. foreign aid. Nixon was the youngest member of the committee and the only Westerner.[57] Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan.[58]
 Nixon campaigning for the Senate, 1950
In his memoirs, Nixon wrote that he joined the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) "at the end of 1947". However, he was already a HUAC member in early February 1947, when he heard "Enemy Number One" Gerhard Eisler and his sister Ruth Fischer testify. On February 18, 1947, Nixon referred to Eisler's belligerence toward HUAC in his maiden speech to the House. Also by early February 1947, fellow U.S. Representative Charles J. Kersten had introduced him to Father John Francis Cronin in Baltimore. Cronin shared with Nixon his 1945 privately circulated paper "The Problem of American Communism in 1945",[59] with much information from the FBI's William C. Sullivan who by 1961 headed domestic intelligence under J. Edgar Hoover.[60]
By May 1948, Nixon had co-sponsored a "Mundt Nixon Bill" to implement "a new approach to the complicated problem of internal communist subversion ... It provided for registration of all Communist Party members and required a statement of the source of all printed and broadcast material issued by organizations that were found to be Communist fronts." He served as floor manager for the Republican Party. On May 19, 1948, the bill passed the House by 319 to 58, but later it failed to pass the Senate.[61] The Nixon Library cites this bill's passage as Nixon's first significant victory in Congress.[62]
Nixon first gained national attention in August 1948, when his persistence as a HUAC member helped break the Alger Hiss spy case. While many doubted Whittaker Chambers's allegations that Hiss, a former State Department official, had been a Soviet spy, Nixon believed them to be true and pressed for the committee to continue its investigation. After Hiss filed suit for defamation, Chambers produced documents corroborating his allegations. These included paper and microfilm copies that Chambers turned over to House investigators after hiding them overnight in a field; they became known as the "Pumpkin Papers".[63] Hiss was convicted of perjury in 1950 for denying under oath he had passed documents to Chambers.[64] In 1948, Nixon successfully cross-filed as a candidate in his district, winning both major party primaries,[65] and was comfortably reelected.[66]
U.S. Senate (1950 1953)
See also: 1950 United States Senate election in California
 Nixon campaigns in Sausalito, California, 1950
In 1949, Nixon began to consider running for the United States Senate against the Democratic incumbent, Sheridan Downey,[67] and entered the race in November.[68] Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas, announced his retirement in March 1950.[69] Nixon and Douglas won the primary elections[70] and engaged in a contentious campaign in which the ongoing Korean War was a major issue.[71] Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas's liberal voting record. As part of that effort, a "Pink Sheet" was distributed by the Nixon campaign suggesting that Douglas's voting record was similar to that of New York Congressman Vito Marcantonio, reputed to be a communist, and their political views must be nearly identical.[72] Nixon won the election by almost twenty percentage points.[73] During the campaign, Nixon was first called "Tricky Dick" by his opponents for his campaign tactics.[74]
In the Senate, Nixon took a prominent position in opposing global communism, traveling frequently and speaking out against it.[75] He maintained friendly relations with his fellow anti-communist, controversial Wisconsin senator Joseph McCarthy, but was careful to keep some distance between himself and McCarthy's allegations.[76] Nixon also criticized President Harry S. Truman's handling of the Korean War.[75] He supported statehood for Alaska and Hawaii, voted in favor of civil rights for minorities, and supported federal disaster relief for India and Yugoslavia.[77] He voted against price controls and other monetary restrictions, benefits for illegal immigrants, and public power.[77]
Vice presidency (1953 1961)
See also: Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower
 Official Vice Presidential portrait
General Dwight D. Eisenhower was nominated for president by the Republicans in 1952. He had no strong preference for a vice-presidential candidate, and Republican officeholders and party officials met in a "smoke-filled room" and recommended Nixon to the general, who agreed to the senator's selection. Nixon's youth (he was then 39), stance against communism, and political base in California one of the largest states were all seen as vote-winners by the leaders. Among the candidates considered along with Nixon were Ohio Senator Robert A. Taft, New Jersey Governor Alfred Driscoll, and Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen.[78][79] On the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke of his plans for the country, and left the negative campaigning to his running mate.[80]
 Front cover of literature for the Eisenhower Nixon campaign, 1952
In mid-September, the Republican ticket faced a major crisis when the media reported that Nixon had a political fund, maintained by his backers, which reimbursed him for political expenses.[81][82] Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of a potential conflict of interest. With pressure building for Eisenhower to demand Nixon's resignation from the ticket, the senator went on television to address the nation on September 23, 1952.[83] The address, later termed the Checkers speech, was heard by about 60 million Americans including the largest television audience up to that point.[84] Nixon emotionally defended himself, stating that the fund was not secret, nor had donors received special favors. He painted himself as a man of modest means (his wife had no mink coat; instead she wore a "respectable Republican cloth coat") and a patriot.[83] The speech was remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back: "a little cocker spaniel dog ... sent all the way from Texas. And our little girl Tricia, the 6-year-old named it Checkers."[83] The speech prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon.[85] Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket,[86] which proved victorious in the November election.[80]
Eisenhower gave Nixon more responsibilities during his term than any previous vice president.[87] Nixon attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings and chaired them in Eisenhower's absence. A 1953 tour of the Far East succeeded in increasing local goodwill toward the United States, and gave Nixon an appreciation of the region as a potential industrial center. He visited Saigon and Hanoi in French Indochina.[88] On his return to the United States at the end of 1953, Nixon increased the time he devoted to foreign relations.[89]
Biographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional years, said of his vice presidency:
Eisenhower radically altered the role of his running mate by presenting him with critical assignments in both foreign and domestic affairs once he assumed his office. The vice president welcomed the president's initiatives and worked energetically to accomplish White House objectives. Because of the collaboration between these two leaders, Nixon deserves the title, "the first modern vice president".[90]
Los Angeles TimesSan Francisco ChronicleAmerican newspaper covers of May 9, 1958, show student protests at the National University of San Marcos during Nixon's visit.
Despite intense campaigning by Nixon, who reprised his strong attacks on the Democrats, the Republicans lost control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections. These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term.[91] On September 24, 1955, President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack and his condition was initially believed to be life-threatening. Eisenhower was unable to perform his duties for six weeks. The 25th Amendment to the United States Constitution had not yet been proposed, and the vice president had no formal power to act. Nonetheless, Nixon acted in Eisenhower's stead during this period, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power.[92] According to Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose, Nixon had "earned the high praise he received for his conduct during the crisis ... he made no attempt to seize power".[93]
His spirits buoyed, Nixon sought a second term, but some of Eisenhower's aides aimed to displace him. In a December 1955 meeting, Eisenhower proposed that Nixon not run for reelection and instead become a Cabinet officer in a second Eisenhower administration, in order to give him administrative experience before a 1960 presidential run. Nixon believed this would destroy his political career. When Eisenhower announced his reelection bid in February 1956, he hedged on the choice of his running mate, saying it was improper to address that question until he had been renominated. Although no Republican was opposing Eisenhower, Nixon received a substantial number of write-in votes against the president in the 1956 New Hampshire primary election. In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate.[94] Eisenhower and Nixon were reelected by a comfortable margin in the November 1956 election.[95]
In early 1957, Nixon undertook another foreign trip, this time to Africa. On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress. The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it. Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did.[96] Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhower's brief illness.[97]
 Nikita Khrushchev and Nixon speak as the press looks on at the Kitchen Debate, July 24, 1959, with What's My Line? host John Charles Daly at far left.
On April 27, 1958, Richard and Pat Nixon reluctantly embarked on a goodwill tour of South America. In Montevideo, Uruguay, Nixon made an impromptu visit to a college campus, where he fielded questions from students on U.S. foreign policy. The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima, Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations. Nixon went to the historical campus of National University of San Marcos, the oldest university in the Americas, got out of his car to confront the students, and stayed until forced back into the car by a volley of thrown objects. At his hotel, Nixon faced another mob, and one demonstrator spat on him.[98] In Caracas, Venezuela, Nixon and his wife were spat on by anti-American demonstrators and their limousine was attacked by a pipe-wielding mob.[99] According to Ambrose, Nixon's courageous conduct "caused even some of his bitterest enemies to give him some grudging respect".[100] Reporting to the cabinet after the trip, Nixon claimed there was "absolute proof that [the protestors] were directed and controlled by a central Communist conspiracy." Secretary of State John Foster Dulles concurred in this view, as did his brother Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles in his own rebuke.[101]
In July 1959 President Eisenhower sent Nixon to the Soviet Union for the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow. On July 24, Nixon was touring the exhibits with Soviet First Secretary and Premier Nikita Khrushchev when the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the "Kitchen Debate".[102]
1960 presidential campaign
Main article: 1960 United States presidential election
 John F. Kennedy and Nixon before their first televised 1960 debate
 1960 electoral vote results
 Nixon and successor Johnson on Inauguration Day 1961
In 1960 Nixon launched his first campaign for President of the United States. He faced little opposition in the Republican primaries[103] and chose former Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. as his running mate.[104] His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy and the race remained close for the duration.[105] Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in ballistic missiles (the "missile gap").[106] While Kennedy faced issues about his Catholicism, Nixon remained a divisive figure to some.[107]
Televised presidential debates made their debut as a political medium during the campaign. In the first of four such debates, Nixon appeared pale, with a five o'clock shadow, in contrast to the photogenic Kennedy.[104] Nixon's performance in the debate was perceived to be mediocre in the visual medium of television, though many people listening on the radio thought Nixon had won.[108] Nixon narrowly lost the election, with Kennedy winning the popular vote by only 112,827 votes (0.2 percent).[104]
There were charges of voter fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy. Nixon refused to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy controversy would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world and that the uncertainty would hurt U.S. interests.[109] At the end of his term of office as vice president in January 1961, Nixon and his family returned to California, where he practiced law and wrote a bestselling book, Six Crises, which included coverage of the Hiss case, Eisenhower's heart attack, and the Fund Crisis, which had been resolved by the Checkers speech.[104][110]
1962 California gubernatorial campaign
Main article: 1962 California gubernatorial election
Local and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for Governor of California in the 1962 gubernatorial election.[104] Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race.[104] The campaign was clouded by public suspicion that Nixon viewed the office as a stepping stone for another presidential run, some opposition from the far-right of the party, and his own lack of interest in being California's governor.[104] Nixon hoped a successful run would confirm his status as the nation's leading active Republican politician, and ensure he remained a major player in national politics.[111] Instead, he lost to Brown by more than five percentage points, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career.[104] In an impromptu concession speech the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, "You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference."[112] The California defeat was highlighted in the November 11, 1962, episode of ABC's Howard K. Smith: News and Comment, titled "The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon".[113] Alger Hiss appeared on the program, and many members of the public complained that it was unseemly to give a convicted felon air time to attack a former vice president. The furor drove Smith and his program from the air,[114] and public sympathy for Nixon grew.[113]
Wilderness years
 Nixon shows his papers to an East German officer to cross between the sectors of the divided City of Berlin, 1963.
In 1963 the Nixon family traveled to Europe, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited.[115] The family moved to New York City, where Nixon became a senior partner in the leading law firm Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie & Alexander.[104] When announcing his California campaign, Nixon had pledged not to run for president in 1964; even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination, Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson.[116]
In 1964, Nixon won write-in votes in the primaries, and was considered a serious contender by both Gallup polls[117][118] and members of the press.[119] He was even placed on a primary ballot as an active candidate by Oregon's secretary of state.[120] Nevertheless, as late as two months before the 1964 Republican National Convention, Nixon fulfilled his promise to remain out of the presidential nomination process and instead gave his support to the eventual Republican nominee, Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater. When Goldwater won the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce him at the convention. Although he thought Goldwater unlikely to win, Nixon campaigned for him loyally. The election was a disaster for the Republicans, as Goldwater's landslide loss to Johnson was matched by heavy losses for the party in Congress and among state governors.[121]
Nixon was one of the few leading Republicans not blamed for the disastrous results, and he sought to build on that in the 1966 Congressional elections. He campaigned for many Republicans, seeking to regain seats lost in the Johnson landslide, and received credit for helping the Republicans make major gains that year.[122]
1968 presidential campaign
Main articles: Richard Nixon 1968 presidential campaign and 1968 United States presidential election
 Nixon and Johnson meet at the White House before Nixon's nomination, July 1968.
At the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time. Pat Nixon did not always enjoy public life,[123] being embarrassed, for example, by the need to reveal how little the family owned in the Checkers speech.[124] She still managed to be supportive of her husband's ambitions. Nixon believed that with the Democrats torn over the issue of the Vietnam War, a Republican had a good chance of winning, although he expected the election to be as close as in 1960.[123]
An exceptionally tumultuous primary election season began as the Tet Offensive was launched in January 1968. President Johnson withdrew as a candidate in March, after an unexpectedly poor showing in the New Hampshire primary. In June, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, a Democratic candidate, was assassinated just moments after his victory in the California primary. On the Republican side, Nixon's main opposition was Michigan Governor George Romney, though New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller and California Governor Ronald Reagan each hoped to be nominated in a brokered convention. Nixon secured the nomination on the first ballot.[125] He selected Maryland Governor Spiro Agnew as his running mate, a choice which Nixon believed would unite the party, appealing both to Northern moderates and to Southerners disaffected with the Democrats.[126]
 Nixon campaigning July 1968
Nixon's Democratic opponent in the general election was Vice President Hubert Humphrey, who was nominated at a convention marked by violent protests.[127] Throughout the campaign, Nixon portrayed himself as a figure of stability during this period of national unrest and upheaval.[127] He appealed to what he later called the "silent majority" of socially conservative Americans who disliked the hippie counterculture and the anti-war demonstrators. Agnew became an increasingly vocal critic of these groups, solidifying Nixon's position with the right.[128]
Nixon waged a prominent television advertising campaign, meeting with supporters in front of cameras.[129] He stressed that the crime rate was too high, and attacked what he perceived as a surrender of the United States' nuclear superiority by the Democrats.[130] Nixon promised "peace with honor" in the Vietnam War and proclaimed that "new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific".[131] He did not give specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a "secret plan".[131] His slogan of "Nixon's the One" proved to be effective.[129]
 1968 electoral vote results; the popular vote split between Nixon and Humphrey was less than one percentage point.
Johnson's negotiators hoped to reach a truce in Vietnam, or at least a cessation of bombings. On October 22, 1968, candidate Nixon received information that Johnson was preparing a so-called "October surprise", abandoning three non-negotiable conditions for a bombing halt, to help elect Humphrey in the last days of the campaign.[132]  Whether the Nixon campaign interfered with negotiations between the Johnson administration and the South Vietnamese by engaging Anna Chennault, a fundraiser for the Republican party, remains a controversy.[132] It is not clear whether the government of South Vietnam needed encouragement to opt out of a peace process they considered disadvantageous.[133]
In a three-way race between Nixon, Humphrey, and American Independent Party candidate George Wallace, Nixon defeated Humphrey by only 500,000 votes, a margin almost as close as  in 1960, with both elections seeing a gap of less than one percentage point of the popular vote. However, Nixon earned 301 electoral votes to 191 for Humphrey and 46 for Wallace, a majority.[127][134] He became the first non-incumbent vice president to be elected president.[135] In his victory speech, Nixon pledged that his administration would try to bring the divided nation together.[136] Nixon said: "I have received a very gracious message from the Vice President, congratulating me for winning the election. I congratulated him for his gallant and courageous fight against great odds. I also told him that I know exactly how he felt. I know how it feels to lose a close one."[137]
Presidency (1969 1974)
Main article: Presidency of Richard NixonFor a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Richard Nixon presidency.
 Nixon is sworn in as the 37th President by Chief Justice Earl Warren. The new First Lady, Pat, holds the family Bible.
Nixon was inaugurated as president on January 20, 1969, sworn in by his onetime political rival, Chief Justice Earl Warren. Pat Nixon held the family Bibles open at Isaiah 2:4, which reads, "They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks." In his inaugural address, which received almost uniformly positive reviews, Nixon remarked that "the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker"[138] a phrase that found a place on his gravestone.[139] He spoke about turning partisan politics into a new age of unity:
In these difficult years, America has suffered from a fever of words; from inflated rhetoric that promises more than it can deliver; from angry rhetoric that fans discontents into hatreds; from bombastic rhetoric that postures instead of persuading. We cannot learn from one another until we stop shouting at one another, until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices.[140]
Foreign policy
Main article: Foreign policy of the Richard Nixon administration
China
Main article: 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
President Nixon shakes hands with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai upon arriving in Beijing, 1972.Nixon and Zhou Enlai toast during Nixon's 1972 visit to China.
Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China before he became president, writing in Foreign Affairs a year before his election: "There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation."[141] Assisting him in this venture was Henry Kissinger, Nixon's  National Security Advisor and future Secretary of State. They collaborated closely, bypassing Cabinet officials. With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir border clashes between the two took place during Nixon's first year in office Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations. A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chinese Communist Party (CCP) chairman Mao Zedong invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players. Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials.[141] On July 15, 1971, with announcements from Washington and Beijing that astounded the world, it was learned that the President would visit China the following February.[142] The secrecy had allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the visit.[143]
In February 1972, Nixon and his wife traveled to China after Kissinger briefed Nixon for over 40 hours in preparation.[144] Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and were greeted by Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. Nixon made a point of shaking Zhou's hand, something which then-Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had refused to do in 1954 when the two met in Geneva.[145] More than a hundred television journalists accompanied the president. On Nixon's orders, television was strongly favored over printed publications, as Nixon felt that the medium would capture the visit much better than print. It also gave him the opportunity to snub the print journalists he despised.[145]
 Mao Zedong and Nixon
Nixon and Kissinger immediately met for an hour with CCP Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou at Mao's official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues.[146] Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon's forthrightness, unlike the leftists and the Soviets.[146] He said he was suspicious of Kissinger,[146] though the National Security Advisor referred to their meeting as his "encounter with history".[145] A formal banquet welcoming the presidential party was given that evening in the Great Hall of the People. The following day, Nixon met with Zhou; the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification.[147] When not in meetings, Nixon toured architectural wonders, including the Forbidden City, the Ming tombs, and the Great Wall.[145] Americans took their first glance into everyday Chinese life through the cameras that accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals.[145]
The visit ushered in a new era of US China relations.[127] Fearing the possibility of a US China alliance, the Soviet Union yielded to pressure for d tente with the United States.[148] This was one component of triangular diplomacy.[149]
Vietnam War
Main articles: Vietnam War, Vietnamization, and Role of the United States in the Vietnam War
 Nixon delivers an address to the nation about the incursion in Cambodia.
When Nixon took office, about 300 American soldiers were dying each week in Vietnam,[150] and the war was widely unpopular in the United States, the subject of ongoing violent protests. The Johnson administration had offered to suspend bombing unconditionally in exchange for negotiations, but to no avail. According to Walter Isaacson, Nixon concluded soon after taking office that the Vietnam War could not be won, and he was determined to end it quickly.[151] He sought an arrangement that would permit American forces to withdraw while leaving South Vietnam secure against attack.[152]
Nixon approved a secret B-52 carpet bombing campaign of North Vietnamese and Khmer Rouge positions in Cambodia beginning in March 1969 and code-named Operation Menu, without the consent of Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk.[153][154][155] In mid-1969, Nixon began efforts to negotiate peace with the North Vietnamese, sending a personal letter to their leaders, and peace talks began in Paris. Initial talks did not result in an agreement,[156] and in May 1969 he publicly proposed to withdraw all American troops from South Vietnam provided North Vietnam did so, and suggesting South Vietnam hold internationally supervised elections with Viet Cong participation.[157]
 Nixon visits American troops in South Vietnam, July 30, 1969.
In July 1969, Nixon visited South Vietnam, where he met with his U.S. military commanders and President Nguy n V n Thi u. Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops, known as "Vietnamization".[127] He soon instituted phased U.S. troop withdrawals,[158] but also authorized incursions into Laos, in part to interrupt the Ho Chi Minh trail passing through Laos and Cambodia and used to supply North Vietnamese forces. In March 1970, at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot's then-second-in-command, Nuon Chea, North Vietnamese troops launched an offensive and overran much of Cambodia.[159] Nixon announced the ground invasion of Cambodia on April 30, 1970, against North Vietnamese bases in the east of the country,[160] and further protests erupted against perceived expansion of the conflict, which resulted in Ohio National Guardsmen killing four unarmed students at Kent State University.[161] Nixon's responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970.[162][163][164] Nixon's campaign promise to curb the war, contrasted with the escalated bombing, led to claims that Nixon had a "credibility gap" on the issue.[158] It is estimated that between 50,000 and 150,000 people were killed during the bombing of Cambodia between 1970 and 1973.[154]
In 1971, excerpts from the "Pentagon Papers", which had been leaked by Daniel Ellsberg, were published by The New York Times and The Washington Post. When news of the leak first appeared, Nixon was inclined to do nothing; the Papers, a history of United States' involvement in Vietnam, mostly concerned the lies of prior administrations and contained few real revelations. He was persuaded by Kissinger that the Papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication, but the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the newspapers.[165]
As U.S. troop withdrawals continued, conscription was phased out by 1973, and the armed forces became all-volunteer.[166] After years of fighting, the Paris Peace Accords were signed at the beginning of 1973. The agreement implemented a cease fire and allowed for the withdrawal of remaining American troops without requiring withdrawal of the 160,000 North Vietnam Army regulars located in the South.[167] Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting resumed, and North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975.[168]
Latin American policy
See also: U.S. intervention in Chile  1973 coup, and Operation Condor
 Nixon with Mexican president Gustavo D az Ordaz (to his right); motorcade in San Diego, California, September 1970
Nixon had been a firm supporter of Kennedy during the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion and 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis. On taking office in 1969, he stepped up covert operations against Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro. He maintained close relations with the Cuban-American exile community through his friend, Bebe Rebozo, who often suggested ways of irritating Castro. The Soviets and Cubans became concerned, fearing Nixon might attack Cuba and break the understanding between Kennedy and Khrushchev that ended the missile crisis. In August 1970, the Soviets asked Nixon to reaffirm the understanding, which he did, despite his hard line against Castro. The process was not completed before the Soviets began expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970. A minor confrontation ensued, the Soviets stipulated they would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles, and the final round of diplomatic notes were exchanged in November.[169]
The election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 spurred a vigorous campaign of covert opposition to him by Nixon and Kissinger.[170]: 25  This began by trying to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election, and then messages to military officers in support of a coup.[170] Other support included strikes organized against Allende and funding for Allende opponents. It was even alleged that "Nixon personally authorized" $700,000 in covert funds to print anti-Allende messages in a prominent Chilean newspaper.[170]: 93  Following an extended period of social, political, and economic unrest, General Augusto Pinochet assumed power in a violent coup d' tat on September 11, 1973; among the dead was Allende.[171]
Soviet Union
 Nixon with Brezhnev during the Soviet leader's trip to the U.S., 1973
Nixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace. Following the announcement of his visit to China, the Nixon administration concluded negotiations for him to visit the Soviet Union. The President and First Lady arrived in Moscow on May 22, 1972, and met with Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Communist Party; Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers; and Nikolai Podgorny, the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, among other leading Soviet officials.[172]
Nixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev.[172] Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties: SALT I, the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers,[127] and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles. Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of "peaceful coexistence". A banquet was held that evening at the Kremlin.[172]
Nixon and Kissinger planned to link arms control to d tente and to the resolution of other urgent problems through what Nixon called "linkage." David Tal argues:
The linkage between strategic arms limitations and outstanding issues such as the Middle East, Berlin and, foremost, Vietnam thus became central to Nixon's and Kissinger's policy of d tente. Through the employment of linkage, they hoped to change the nature and course of U.S. foreign policy, including U.S. nuclear disarmament and arms control policy, and to separate them from those practiced by Nixon's predecessors. They also intended, through linkage, to make U.S. arms control policy part of d tente ... His policy of linkage had in fact failed. It failed mainly because it was based on flawed assumptions and false premises, the foremost of which was that the Soviet Union wanted strategic arms limitation agreement much more than the United States did.[173]
Seeking to foster better relations with the United States, China and the Soviet Union both cut back on their diplomatic support for North Vietnam and advised Hanoi to come to terms militarily.[174] Nixon later described his strategy:
I had long believed that an indispensable element of any successful peace initiative in Vietnam was to enlist, if possible, the help of the Soviets and the Chinese. Though rapprochement with China and d tente with the Soviet Union were ends in themselves, I also considered them possible means to hasten the end of the war. At worst, Hanoi was bound to feel less confident if Washington was dealing with Moscow and Beijing. At best, if the two major Communist powers decided that they had bigger fish to fry, Hanoi would be pressured into negotiating a settlement we could accept.[175]
In 1973, Nixon encouraged the Export-Import Bank to finance in part a trade deal with the Soviet Union in which Armand Hammer's Occidental Petroleum would export phosphate from Florida to the Soviet Union, and import Soviet ammonia. The deal, valued at $20 billion over 20 years, involved the construction of two major Soviet port facilities at Odessa and Ventspils,[176][177][178] and a pipeline connecting four ammonia plants in the greater Volga region to the port at Odessa.[178] In 1973, Nixon announced his administration was committed to seeking most favored nation trade status with the USSR,[179] which was challenged by Congress in the Jackson-Vanik Amendment.[180]
During the previous two years, Nixon had made considerable progress in U.S. Soviet relations, and he embarked on a second trip to the Soviet Union in 1974.[181] He arrived in Moscow on June 27 to a welcome ceremony, cheering crowds, and a state dinner at the Grand Kremlin Palace that evening.[181] Nixon and Brezhnev met in Yalta, where they discussed a proposed mutual defense pact, d tente, and MIRVs. Nixon considered proposing a comprehensive test-ban treaty, but he felt he would not have time to complete it during his presidency.[181] There were no significant breakthroughs in these negotiations.[181]
Middle Eastern policy
 Nixon with Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir, June 1974
 Nixon with President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, June 1974
As part of the Nixon Doctrine, the U.S. avoided giving direct combat assistance to its allies and instead gave them assistance to defend themselves. During the Nixon administration, the U.S. greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East, particularly Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia.[182] The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East, but the support was not unconditional. Nixon believed Israel should make peace with its Arab neighbors and that the U.S. should encourage it. The president believed that except during the Suez Crisis the U.S. had failed to intervene with Israel, and should use the leverage of the large U.S. military aid to Israel to urge the parties to the negotiating table. The Arab-Israeli conflict was not a major focus of Nixon's attention during his first term for one thing, he felt that no matter what he did, American Jews would oppose his reelection.[a]
On October 6, 1973, an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria, supported with arms and materiel by the Soviet Union, attacked Israel in the Yom Kippur War. Israel suffered heavy losses and Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses, cutting through inter-departmental squabbles and bureaucracy and taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations. More than a week later, by the time the U.S. and Soviet Union began negotiating a truce, Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory. The truce negotiations rapidly escalated into a superpower crisis; when Israel gained the upper hand, Egyptian President Sadat requested a joint U.S. USSR peacekeeping mission, which the U.S. refused. When Soviet Premier Brezhnev threatened to unilaterally enforce any peacekeeping mission militarily, Nixon ordered the U.S. military to DEFCON3,[183] placing all U.S. military personnel and bases on alert for nuclear war. This was the closest the world had come to nuclear war since the Cuban Missile Crisis. Brezhnev backed down as a result of Nixon's actions.[184]
Because Israel's victory was largely due to U.S. support, the Arab OPEC nations retaliated by refusing to sell crude oil to the U.S., resulting in the 1973 oil crisis.[185] The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, and was eventually ended by the oil-producing nations as peace in the Middle East took hold.[186]
After the war, and under Nixon's presidency, the U.S. reestablished relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967. Nixon used the Middle East crisis to restart the stalled Middle East Peace Negotiations; he wrote in a confidential memo to Kissinger on October 20:
I believe that, beyond a doubt, we are now facing the best opportunity we have had in 15 years to build a lasting peace in the Middle East. I am convinced history will hold us responsible if we let this opportunity slip by ... I now consider a permanent Middle East settlement to be the most important final goal to which we must devote ourselves.[187]
Nixon made one of his final international visits as president to the Middle East in June 1974, and became the first President to visit Israel.[188]
Domestic policy
Economy
Further information: Nixon shock and 1970s energy crisis
 Nixon at the Washington Senators' 1969 Opening Day with team owner Bob Short (arms folded) and Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn (hand on mouth). Nixon's aide, Major Jack Brennan, sits behind them in uniform.
At the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7 percent its highest rate since the Korean War. The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits. Unemployment was low, but interest rates were at their highest in a century.[189] Nixon's major economic goal was to reduce inflation; the most obvious means of doing so was to end the war.[189] This could not be accomplished overnight, and the U.S. economy continued to struggle through 1970, contributing to a lackluster Republican performance in the midterm congressional elections (Democrats controlled both Houses of Congress throughout Nixon's presidency).[190] According to political economist Nigel Bowles in his 2011 study of Nixon's economic record, the new president did little to alter Johnson's policies through the first year of his presidency.[191]
Nixon was far more interested in foreign affairs than domestic policies, but he believed that voters tend to focus on their own financial condition and that economic conditions were a threat to his reelection. As part of his "New Federalism" views, he proposed grants to the states, but these proposals were for the most part lost in the congressional budget process. However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them.[190] In 1970, Congress had granted the president the power to impose wage and price freezes, though the Democratic majorities, knowing Nixon had opposed such controls throughout his career, did not expect Nixon to actually use the authority.[191] With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David. Nixon's options were to limit fiscal and monetary expansionist policies that reduced unemployment or end the dollar's fixed exchange rate; Nixon's dilemma has been cited as an example of the Impossible trinity in international economics.[192][193] He then announced temporary wage and price controls, allowed the dollar to float against other currencies, and ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold.[194] Bowles points out,
by identifying himself with a policy whose purpose was inflation's defeat, Nixon made it difficult for Democratic opponents ... to criticize him. His opponents could offer no alternative policy that was either plausible or believable since the one they favored was one they had designed but which the president had appropriated for himself.[191]
Nixon's policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration.[194] Nixon's decision to end the gold standard in the United States led to the collapse of the Bretton Woods system. According to Thomas Oatley, "the Bretton Woods system collapsed so that Nixon might win the 1972 presidential election."[192]
After Nixon won re-election, inflation was returning.[195] He reimposed price controls in June 1973. The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy.[195] The controls produced food shortages, as meat disappeared from grocery stores and farmers drowned chickens rather than sell them at a loss.[195] Despite the failure to control inflation, controls were slowly ended, and on April 30, 1974, their statutory authorization lapsed.[195]
Governmental initiatives and organization
 Nixon gives 1971 State of the Union Address.
 Official Nixon portrait by James Anthony Wills, c. 1984
 Graph of increases in U.S. incarceration rate
Nixon advocated a "New Federalism", which would devolve power to state and local elected officials, though Congress was hostile to these ideas and enacted few of them.[196] He eliminated the Cabinet-level United States Post Office Department, which in 1971 became the government-run United States Postal Service.[197]
Nixon was a late supporter of the conservation movement. Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election, and the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject. Nixon broke new ground by discussing environmental policy in his State of the Union speech in 1970. He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit; in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).[198] He relied on his domestic advisor John Ehrlichman, who favored protection of natural resources, to keep him "out of trouble on environmental issues."[199] Other initiatives supported by Nixon included the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the National Environmental Policy Act required environmental impact statements for many Federal projects.[199][198] Nixon vetoed the Clean Water Act of 1972 objecting not to the policy goals of the legislation but to the amount of money to be spent on them, which he deemed excessive. After Congress overrode his veto, Nixon impounded the funds he deemed unjustifiable.[200]
In 1971, Nixon proposed health insurance reform a private health insurance employer mandate,[b] federalization of Medicaid for poor families with dependent minor children,[201] and support for health maintenance organizations (HMOs).[202] A limited HMO bill was enacted in 1973.[202] In 1974, Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform a private health insurance employer mandate[b] and replacement of Medicaid by state-run health insurance plans available to all, with income-based premiums and cost sharing.[203]
Nixon was concerned about the prevalence of domestic drug use in addition to drug use among American soldiers in Vietnam. He called for a War on Drugs and pledged to cut off sources of supply abroad. He also increased funds for education and for rehabilitation facilities.[204]
As one policy initiative, Nixon called for more money for sickle-cell research, treatment, and education in February 1971[205] and signed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act on May 16, 1972.[206][207][c] While Nixon called for increased spending on such high-profile items as sickle-cell disease and for a War on Cancer, at the same time he sought to reduce overall spending at the National Institutes of Health.[208]
Civil rights
The Nixon presidency witnessed the first large-scale integration of public schools in the South.[209] Nixon sought a middle way between the segregationist Wallace and liberal Democrats, whose support of integration was alienating some Southern whites.[210] Hopeful of doing well in the South in 1972, he sought to dispose of desegregation as a political issue before then. Soon after his inauguration, he appointed Vice President Agnew to lead a task force, which worked with local leaders both white and black to determine how to integrate local schools. Agnew had little interest in the work, and most of it was done by Labor Secretary George Shultz. Federal aid was available, and a meeting with President Nixon was a possible reward for compliant committees. By September 1970, less than ten percent of black children were attending segregated schools. By 1971, however, tensions over desegregation surfaced in Northern cities, with angry protests over the busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood to achieve racial balance. Nixon opposed busing personally but enforced court orders requiring its use.[211]
Some scholars, such as James Morton Turner and John Isenberg, believe that Nixon, who had advocated for civil rights in his 1960 campaign, slowed down desegregation as president, appealing to the racial conservatism of Southern whites, who were angered by the civil rights movement. This, he hoped, would boost his election chances in 1972.[212][213]
In addition to desegregating public schools, Nixon implemented the Philadelphia Plan in 1970 the first significant federal affirmative action program.[214] He also endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment after it passed both houses of Congress in 1972 and went to the states for ratification.[215] He also pushed for African American civil rights and economic equity through a concept known as black capitalism.[216] Nixon had campaigned as an ERA supporter in 1968, though feminists criticized him for doing little to help the ERA or their cause after his election. Nevertheless, he appointed more women to administration positions than Lyndon Johnson had.[217]
Space policy
Further information: Space policy of the United States
 Nixon visiting the Apollo 11 astronauts in quarantine aboard the aircraft carrier USS Hornet
After a nearly decade-long national effort, the United States won the race to land astronauts on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11. Nixon spoke with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their moonwalk. He called the conversation "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House".[218]
Nixon was unwilling to keep funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at the high level seen during the 1960s as NASA prepared to send men to the Moon. NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine drew up ambitious plans for the establishment of a permanent base on the Moon by the end of the 1970s and the launch of a crewed expedition to Mars as early as 1981. Nixon rejected both proposals due to the expense.[219] Nixon also canceled the Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory program in 1969, because uncrewed spy satellites were a more cost-effective way to achieve the same reconnaissance objective.[220] NASA cancelled the last three planned Apollo lunar missions to place Skylab in orbit more efficiently and free money up for the design and construction of the Space Shuttle.[221]
On May 24, 1972, Nixon approved a five-year cooperative program between NASA and the Soviet space program, culminating in the 1975 joint mission of an American Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft linking in space.[222]
Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation
1972 presidential campaign
Main article: 1972 United States presidential election
 1972 electoral vote results
Nixon believed his rise to power had peaked at a moment of political realignment. The Democratic "Solid South" had long been a source of frustration to Republican ambitions. Goldwater had won several Southern states by opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 but had alienated more moderate Southerners. Nixon's efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallace's candidacy. Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the civil rights movement. He nominated two Southern conservatives, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court, but neither was confirmed by the Senate.[223]
Nixon entered his name on the New Hampshire primary ballot on January 5, 1972, effectively announcing his candidacy for reelection.[224] Virtually assured the Republican nomination,[225] the President had initially expected his Democratic opponent to be Massachusetts Senator Edward M. Kennedy (brother of the late President), who was largely removed from contention after the July 1969 Chappaquiddick incident.[226] Instead, Maine Senator Edmund Muskie became the front runner, with South Dakota Senator George McGovern in a close second place.[224]
On June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination.[227] The following month, Nixon was renominated at the 1972 Republican National Convention. He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive.[228] McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending[229] and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights. With some of his supporters believed to be in favor of drug legalization, McGovern was perceived as standing for "amnesty, abortion and acid". McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri Senator Thomas Eagleton, dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received electroshock treatment for depression.[230][231] Nixon was ahead in most polls for the entire election cycle, and was reelected on November 7, 1972, in one of the largest landslide election victories in American history. He defeated McGovern with over 60 percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and D.C.[232]
Watergate
Main articles: Watergate scandal and Impeachment process of Richard Nixon
 Nixon takes questions at 1973 press conference.
The term Watergate has come to encompass an array of clandestine and often illegal activities undertaken by members of the Nixon administration. Those activities included "dirty tricks," such as bugging the offices of political opponents, and the harassment of activist groups and political figures. The activities were brought to light after five men were caught breaking into the Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C. on June 17, 1972. The Washington Post picked up on the story; reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as "Deep Throat" later revealed to be Mark Felt, associate director at the FBI to link the men to the Nixon administration. Nixon downplayed the scandal as mere politics, calling news articles biased and misleading. A series of revelations made it clear that the Committee to Re-elect President Nixon, and later the White House, were involved in attempts to sabotage the Democrats. Senior aides such as White House Counsel John Dean faced prosecution; in total 48 officials were convicted of wrongdoing.[127][233][234]
 Demonstrator demands impeachment, October 1973.
 On November 17, 1973, President Nixon held a press conference at Disney's Contemporary Resort and famously says  I m not a crook 
In July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified under oath to Congress that Nixon had a secret taping system and recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office. These tapes were subpoenaed by Watergate Special Counsel Archibald Cox; Nixon provided transcripts of the conversations but not the actual tapes, citing executive privilege. With the White House and Cox at loggerheads, Nixon had Cox fired in October in the "Saturday Night Massacre"; he was replaced by Leon Jaworski. In November, Nixon's lawyers revealed that a tape of conversations held in the White House on June 20, 1972, had an 18+1 2 minute gap.[234] Rose Mary Woods, the President's personal secretary, claimed responsibility for the gap, saying that she had accidentally wiped the section while transcribing the tape, but her story was widely mocked. The gap, while not conclusive proof of wrongdoing by the President, cast doubt on Nixon's statement that he had been unaware of the cover-up.[235]
Though Nixon lost much popular support, even from his own party, he rejected accusations of wrongdoing and vowed to stay in office.[234] He admitted he had made mistakes but insisted he had no prior knowledge of the burglary, did not break any laws, and did not learn of the cover-up until early 1973.[236] On October 10, 1973, Vice President Agnew resigned for reasons unrelated to Watergate: he was convicted on charges of bribery, tax evasion and money laundering during his tenure as governor of Maryland. Believing his first choice, John Connally, would not be confirmed by Congress,[237] Nixon chose Gerald Ford, Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, to replace Agnew.[238] One researcher suggests Nixon effectively disengaged from his own administration after Ford was sworn in as vice president on December 6, 1973.[239]
On November 17, 1973, during a televised question-and-answer session[240] with 400 Associated Press managing editors, Nixon said, "People have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. Well, I'm not a crook. I've earned everything I've got."[241]
 Nixon announces the release of edited transcripts of the Watergate tapes, April 29, 1974.
The legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between himself and his aides. The House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against the President on May 9, 1974, which were televised on the major TV networks. These hearings culminated in votes for impeachment.[236] On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts, must be released.[242]
The scandal grew to involve a slew of additional allegations against the President, ranging from the improper use of government agencies to accepting gifts in office and his personal finances and taxes; Nixon repeatedly stated his willingness to pay any outstanding taxes due, and later paid $465,000 (equivalent to $2.6 million in 2021) in back taxes in 1974.[243]
 Nixon Oval Office meeting with H.R. Haldeman "Smoking Gun" Conversation June 23, 1972 (Full Transcript)
Even with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to fight the charges. But one of the new tapes, recorded soon after the break-in, demonstrated that Nixon had been told of the White House connection to the Watergate burglaries soon after they took place, and had approved plans to thwart the investigation. In a statement accompanying the release of what became known as the "Smoking Gun Tape" on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of White House involvement, stating that he had had a lapse of memory.[244] Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott, Senator Barry Goldwater, and House Minority Leader John Jacob Rhodes met with Nixon soon after. Rhodes told Nixon he faced certain impeachment in the House. Scott and Goldwater told the president that he had, at most, only 15 votes in his favor in the Senate, far fewer than the 34 needed to avoid removal from office.[245]
Resignation
 Nixon leaving the White House on Marine One shortly before his resignation became effective, August 9, 1974
In light of his loss of political support and the near-certainty that he would be impeached and removed from office, Nixon resigned the presidency on August 9, 1974, after addressing the nation on television the previous evening.[236] The resignation speech was delivered from the Oval Office and was carried live on radio and television. Nixon said he was resigning for the good of the country and asked the nation to support the new president, Gerald Ford. Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency, especially in foreign policy.[246] He defended his record as president, quoting from Theodore Roosevelt's 1910 speech Citizenship in a Republic:
Sometimes I have succeeded and sometimes I have failed, but always I have taken heart from what Theodore Roosevelt once said about the man in the arena, "whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs and comes up short again and again because there is not effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deed, who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievements and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly".[247]
 President Nixons resignation speech.
Nixon's speech received generally favorable initial responses from network commentators, with only Roger Mudd of CBS stating that Nixon had not admitted wrongdoing.[248] It was termed "a masterpiece" by Conrad Black, one of his biographers. Black opined that "What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue. He left while devoting half his address to a recitation of his accomplishments in office."[249]
Post-presidency (1974 1994)
Pardon and illness
Further information: Pardon of Richard Nixon
 President Ford announcing his decision to pardon Nixon, September 8, 1974, in the Oval Office
Following his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente, California.[250] According to his biographer, Jonathan Aitken, "Nixon was a soul in torment" after his resignation.[251] Congress had funded Nixon's transition costs, including some salary expenses, though reducing the appropriation from $850,000 to $200,000. With some of his staff still with him, Nixon was at his desk by 7:00 a.m. with little to do.[251] His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler, sat with him alone for hours each day.[252]
Nixon's resignation had not put an end to the desire among many to see him punished. The Ford White House considered a pardon of Nixon, even though it would be unpopular in the country. Nixon, contacted by Ford emissaries, was initially reluctant to accept the pardon, but then agreed to do so. Ford insisted on a statement of contrition, but Nixon felt he had not committed any crimes and should not have to issue such a document. Ford eventually agreed, and on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a "full, free, and absolute pardon", which ended any possibility of an indictment. Nixon then released a statement:
I was wrong in not acting more decisively and more forthrightly in dealing with Watergate, particularly when it reached the stage of judicial proceedings and grew from a political scandal into a national tragedy. No words can describe the depth of my regret and pain at the anguish my mistakes over Watergate have caused the nation and the presidency, a nation I so deeply love, and an institution I so greatly respect.[253][254]
In October 1974, Nixon fell ill with phlebitis. Told by his doctors that he could either be operated on or die, a reluctant Nixon chose surgery, and President Ford visited him in the hospital. Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman and The Washington Post, disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the "wrong foot". Judge John Sirica excused Nixon's presence despite the defendants' objections.[255] Congress instructed Ford to retain Nixon's presidential papers beginning a three-decade legal battle over the documents that was eventually won by the former president and his estate.[256] Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 49 seats in the House and four in the Senate.[257]
Return to public life
 President Jimmy Carter and ex-Presidents Gerald Ford and Nixon meet at the White House before former Vice President Hubert Humphrey's funeral, 1978.
In December 1974, Nixon began planning his comeback despite the considerable ill will against him in the country. He wrote in his diary, referring to himself and Pat,
So be it. We will see it through. We've had tough times before and we can take the tougher ones that we will have to go through now. That is perhaps what we were made for to be able to take punishment beyond what anyone in this office has had before particularly after leaving office. This is a test of character and we must not fail the test.[258]
 Nixon speaking with Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping and U.S. President Jimmy Carter at the White House, 1979
By early 1975, Nixon's health was improving. He maintained an office in a Coast Guard station 300 yards from his home, at first taking a golf cart and later walking the route each day; he mainly worked on his memoirs.[259] He had hoped to wait before writing his memoirs; the fact that his assets were being eaten away by expenses and lawyer fees compelled him to begin work quickly.[260] He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with many of his staff, including Ziegler.[261] In August of that year, he met with British talk-show host and producer David Frost, who paid him $600,000 (equivalent to $3 million in 2021) for a series of sit-down interviews, filmed and aired in 1977.[262] They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate. Nixon admitted he had "let down the country" and that "I brought myself down. I gave them a sword and they stuck it in. And they twisted it with relish. And, I guess, if I'd been in their position, I'd have done the same thing."[263] The interviews garnered 45 50 million viewers becoming the most-watched program of its kind in television history.[264]
The interviews helped improve Nixon's financial position at one point in early 1975 he had only $500 in the bank as did the sale of his Key Biscayne property to a trust set up by wealthy friends of Nixon, such as Bebe Rebozo.[265] In February 1976, Nixon visited China at the personal invitation of Mao. Nixon had wanted to return to China but chose to wait until after Ford's own visit in 1975.[266] Nixon remained neutral in the close 1976 primary battle between Ford and Reagan. Ford won, but was defeated by Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter in the general election. The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold its official invitation.[267]
In 1976, Nixon was disbarred by the New York State Bar Association for obstruction of justice in the Watergate affair. He chose not to present any defense.[268] In early 1978, he visited the United Kingdom; there, he was shunned by American diplomats, most ministers of the James Callaghan government, and two former prime ministers, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath. He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition, Margaret Thatcher, as well as by former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson. Nixon addressed the Oxford Union regarding Watergate:
[Some people] felt that on this matter that I had not handled it properly, and they were right. I screwed it up and I paid the price.[269][270]
Author and elder statesman
 President Ronald Reagan meets with his three immediate predecessors, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter and Nixon, at the White House, October 1981; the three former presidents would represent the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat.
In 1978, Nixon published his memoirs, RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, the first of ten books he was to author in his retirement.[250] The book was a bestseller and attracted a generally positive critical response.[271] Nixon visited the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Carter had not wanted to invite Nixon, but Deng had said he would visit Nixon in California if the former president was not invited. Nixon had a private meeting with Deng and visited Beijing again in mid-1979.[272]
On August 10, 1979, the Nixons purchased a 12 room condominium occupying the seventh floor of 817 Fifth Avenue New York City[273] after being rejected by two Manhattan co-ops.[274] When the deposed Shah of Iran died in Egypt in July 1980, Nixon defied the State Department, which intended to send no U.S. representative, by attending the funeral. Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president he was seen as the American presence at its former ally's funeral.[275] Nixon supported Ronald Reagan for president in 1980, making television appearances portraying himself as, in biographer Stephen Ambrose's words, "the senior statesman above the fray".[276] He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagan's victory.[277] After eighteen months in the New York City townhouse, Nixon and his wife moved in 1981 to Saddle River, New Jersey.[250]
Throughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing,[250] traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries. He joined former Presidents Ford and Carter as representatives of the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat.[250] On a trip to the Middle East, Nixon made his views known regarding Saudi Arabia and Libya, which attracted significant U.S. media attention; The Washington Post ran stories on Nixon's "rehabilitation".[278] Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1986 and on his return sent President Reagan a lengthy memorandum containing foreign policy suggestions and his personal impressions of Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev.[250] Following this trip, Nixon was ranked in a Gallup poll as one of the ten most admired men in the world.[279]
 Nixon with President Bill Clinton in the residence of the White House, March 1993
In 1986, Nixon addressed a convention of newspaper publishers, impressing his audience with his tour d'horizon of the world.[280] At the time, political pundit Elizabeth Drew wrote, "Even when he was wrong, Nixon still showed that he knew a great deal and had a capacious memory, as well as the capacity to speak with apparent authority, enough to impress people who had little regard for him in earlier times."[280] Newsweek ran a story on "Nixon's comeback" with the headline "He's back".[281]
On July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, California opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance. They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, as well as their wives, Betty, Nancy, and Barbara.[282] In January 1994, the former president founded the Nixon Center (today the Center for the National Interest), a Washington policy think tank and conference center.[283][284]
Pat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer. Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. Former President Nixon was distraught throughout the interment and delivered a tribute to her inside the library building.[285]
Death and funeral
Main article: Death and state funeral of Richard Nixon
 Five U.S. presidents (then-incumbent President Bill Clinton, George H.W. Bush, Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford) and their wives attending Nixon's funeral, April 27, 1994
Nixon suffered a severe stroke on April 18, 1994, while preparing to eat dinner in his home at Park Ridge, New Jersey.[286] A blood clot resulting from the atrial fibrillation he had suffered for many years had formed in his upper heart, broken off, and traveled to his brain.[287] He was taken to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan, initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg.[286] Damage to the brain caused swelling (cerebral edema), and Nixon slipped into a deep coma. He died at 9:08 p.m. on April 22, 1994, with his daughters at his bedside. He was 81 years old.[286]
Nixon's funeral took place on April 27, 1994, in Yorba Linda, California. Eulogists at the Nixon Library ceremony included President Bill Clinton, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, California Governor Pete Wilson, and the Reverend Billy Graham. Also in attendance were former Presidents Ford, Carter, Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and their wives.[288]
Richard Nixon was buried beside his wife Pat on the grounds of the Nixon Library. He was survived by his two daughters, Tricia and Julie, and four grandchildren.[286] In keeping with his wishes, his funeral was not a full state funeral, though his body did lie in repose in the Nixon Library lobby from April 26 to the morning of the funeral service.[289] Mourners waited in line for up to eight hours in chilly, wet weather to pay their respects.[290] At its peak, the line to pass by Nixon's casket was three miles long with an estimated 42,000 people waiting.[291]
John F. Stacks of Time magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death,
An outsize energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every self-created disaster that he faced. To reclaim a respected place in American public life after his resignation, he kept traveling and thinking and talking to the world's leaders ... and by the time Bill Clinton came to the White House [in 1993], Nixon had virtually cemented his role as an elder statesman. Clinton, whose wife served on the staff of the committee that voted to impeach Nixon, met openly with him and regularly sought his advice.[292]
Tom Wicker of The New York Times noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixon's 1962 farewell speech, wrote,
Richard Nixon's jowly, beard-shadowed face, the ski-jump nose and the widow's peak, the arms upstretched in the V-sign, had been so often pictured and caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation really would not "have Nixon to kick around anymore".[293]
Ambrose said of the reaction to Nixon's death, "To everyone's amazement, except his, he's our beloved elder statesman."[294]
 The graves of President Richard Nixon and First Lady Pat Nixon
Upon Nixon's death, the news coverage mentioned Watergate and the resignation but much of the coverage was favorable to the former president. The Dallas Morning News stated, "History ultimately should show that despite his flaws, he was one of our most farsighted chief executives."[295] This offended some; columnist Russell Baker complained of "a group conspiracy to grant him absolution".[296] Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the Omaha World-Herald depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly. The artist urges his audience to sit down; the work will take some time to complete, as "this portrait is a little more complicated than most".[297]
Hunter S. Thompson wrote a scathing piece denouncing Nixon for Rolling Stone, entitled "He Was a Crook" (which also appeared a month later in The Atlantic).[298] In his article, Thompson described Nixon as "a political monster straight out of Grendel and a very dangerous enemy".[298]
Legacy
Main article: List of awards and honors received by Richard Nixon
Historian and political scientist James MacGregor Burns asked of Nixon, "How can one evaluate such an idiosyncratic president, so brilliant and so morally lacking?"[299] Nixon's biographers disagree on how he will be perceived by posterity. According to Ambrose, "Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished. What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation."[300] Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's Congressional career, suggests, "He was remarkable among his congressional peers, a success story in a troubled era, one who steered a sensible anti-Communist course against the excess of McCarthy."[301] Aitken feels that "Nixon, both as a man and as a statesman, has been excessively maligned for his faults and inadequately recognised for his virtues. Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism, no simple verdict is possible."[302]
Some historians say Nixon's Southern Strategy turned the Southern United States into a Republican stronghold, while others deem economic factors more important in the change.[223] Throughout his career, Nixon moved his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a Congressman he was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism.[303] According to his biographer Herbert Parmet, "Nixon's role was to steer the Republican party along a middle course, somewhere between the competitive impulses of the Rockefellers, the Goldwaters, and the Reagans."[304]
Nixon's stance on domestic affairs has been credited with the passage and enforcement of environmental and regulatory legislation. In a 2011 paper on Nixon and the environment, historian Paul Charles Milazzo points to Nixon's creation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and to his enforcement of legislation such as the 1973 Endangered Species Act, stating that "though unsought and unacknowledged, Richard Nixon's environmental legacy is secure".[305] Nixon himself did not consider the environmental advances he made in office an important part of his legacy; some historians contend that his choices were driven more by political expediency than any strong environmentalism.[199]
 Richard Nixon's Presidential Library and Museum located in Yorba Linda, California
Nixon saw his policies on Vietnam, China, and the Soviet Union as central to his place in history.[182] Nixon's onetime opponent George McGovern commented in 1983, "President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World War II ... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history."[306] Political scientist Jussi Hanhim ki disagrees, saying that Nixon's diplomacy was merely a continuation of the Cold War policy of containment by diplomatic, rather than military, means.[182] Kissinger noted similarities between Nixon's opening of China in 1972 and President Donald Trump's Middle East diplomacy.[307] Historian Christopher Andrew concludes that "Nixon was a great statesman on the world stage as well as a shabby practitioner of electoral politics in the domestic arena. While the criminal farce of Watergate was in the making, Nixon's inspirational statesmanship was establishing new working relationships both with Communist China and with the Soviet Union."[308]
Historian Keith W. Olson has written that Nixon left a legacy of fundamental mistrust of government, rooted in Vietnam and Watergate.[309] In surveys of historians and political scientists, Nixon is generally ranked as a below-average president.[310][311][312] During the impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, both sides tried to use Nixon and Watergate to their advantage: Republicans suggested that Clinton's misconduct was comparable to Nixon's, while Democrats contended that Nixon's actions had been far more serious than Clinton's.[313] Another legacy, for a time, was a decrease in the power of the presidency as Congress passed restrictive legislation in the wake of Watergate. Olson suggests that legislation in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks restored the president's power.[309]
Personality and public image
Nixon's career was frequently dogged by his persona and the public's perception of it. Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms, to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred. He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders, and a furrowed, sweaty brow.[314]
 With Elvis Presley in December 1970: "The President & The King"
Nixon had a complex personality, both very secretive and awkward, yet strikingly reflective about himself. He was inclined to distance himself from people and was formal in all aspects, wearing a coat and tie even when home alone.[315] Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being "driven" though also "uneasy with himself in some ways".[316] According to Black, Nixon
thought that he was doomed to be traduced, double-crossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job, but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail.[317]
 Presidents Gerald Ford, Nixon, George H. W. Bush, Ronald Reagan, and Jimmy Carter in 1991
 Campaign button
Nixon sometimes drank alcohol to excess, especially during 1970. He also was prescribed sleeping pills. According to Ray Price, Nixon sometimes took them in together. Nixon also took dilantin, recommended by Jack Dreyfus. That medicine is usually prescribed to treat and prevent seizures, but in Nixon's case it was for depression. His periodic overindulgences, especially during stressful times such as during Apollo 13, concerned Price and others, including then-advisor Ehrlichman and long-time valet Manolo Sanchez.[318] Author and former British politician David Owen deemed Nixon an alcoholic.[319][320]
Biographer Elizabeth Drew summarized Nixon as a "smart, talented man, but most peculiar and haunted of presidents".[321] In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as "a strange man of uncomfortable shyness, who functioned best alone with his thoughts".[322] Nixon's presidency was doomed by his personality, Reeves argues:
He assumed the worst in people and he brought out the worst in them ... He clung to the idea of being "tough". He thought that was what had brought him to the edge of greatness. But that was what betrayed him. He could not open himself to other men and he could not open himself to greatness.[323]
In October 1999, a volume of 1971 White House audio tapes was released which contained multiple statements by Nixon deemed derogatory toward Jews.[324] In one conversation with H. R. Haldeman, Nixon said that Washington was "full of Jews" and that "most Jews are disloyal", making exceptions for some of his top aides.[325] He then added, "But, Bob, generally speaking, you can't trust the bastards. They turn on you. Am I wrong or right?"[325] Elsewhere on the 1971 recordings, Nixon denies being antisemitic, saying, "If anybody who's been in this chair ever had reason to be antisemitic, I did ... And I'm not, you know what I mean?"[325]
Nixon believed that putting distance between himself and other people was necessary for him as he advanced in his political career and became president. Even Bebe Rebozo, by some accounts his closest friend, did not call him by his first name. Nixon said of this,
Even with close friends, I don't believe in letting your hair down, confiding this and that and the other thing saying, "Gee, I couldn't sleep ..." I believe you should keep your troubles to yourself. That's just the way I am. Some people are different. Some people think it's good therapy to sit with a close friend and, you know, just spill your guts ... [and] reveal their inner psyche whether they were breast-fed or bottle-fed. Not me. No way.[326]
When Nixon was told that most Americans felt they did not know him even at the end of his career, he replied, "Yeah, it's true. And it's not necessary for them to know."[326]
Books
Nixon, Richard M. (1960) Six Crises, Doubleday, ISBN 978-0-385-00125-0
Quotations from the would-be chairman: Richard Milhous Nixon, edited by M. B. Schnapper (Washington: Public Affairs Press, 1968)
Nixon, Richard M. (1978) RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 978-0-671-70741-5
Nixon, Richard M. (1980) The Real War, Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd. ISBN 978-0-283-98650-5
Nixon, Richard M. (1982) Leaders, Random House ISBN 978-0-446-51249-7.
Nixon, Richard M. (1984) Real Peace, Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd ISBN 978-0-283-99076-2
External video Part One of Booknotes interview with Nixon on Seize the Moment, February 23, 1992 Part Two of Booknotes interview, March 1, 1992
Nixon, Richard M. (1987) No More Vietnams, Arbor House Publishing ISBN 978-0-87795-668-6
Nixon, Richard M. (1988) 1999: Victory Without War, Simon & Schuster ISBN 978-0-671-62712-6
Nixon, Richard M. (1990) In the Arena: A Memoir of Victory, Defeat, and Renewal, Simon & Schuster ISBN 978-0-671-72318-7.
Nixon, Richard M. (1992) Seize the Moment: America's Challenge in a One-Superpower World, Simon & Schuster ISBN 978-0-671-74343-7
Nixon, Richard M. (1994) Beyond Peace, Random House (1994) ISBN 978-0-679-43323-1.
See also
Cultural depictions of Richard Nixon
Electoral history of Richard Nixon
Nixon (film)
Presidential transition of Richard Nixon
Notes
^  Black, pp. 583 585. In 1972, Nixon did more than double his percentage of the Jewish vote, from 17 percent to 35 percent. Merkley, p. 68.
^ a b voluntary for employees
^ see especially page 2 (after introductory material) in which a bar graph displays NHLBI funding for sickle cell research from FY 1972 through FY 2001, totaling $923 million for these thirty years, starting at $10 million for 1972, then about $15 million a year through 1976, about $20 million for 1977, etc
References
Citations
^ a b c "Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum" (PDF). September 21, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2015.
^ "Lincoln Wins: Honest Abe tops new presidential survey". CNN. February 16, 2009. Retrieved December 2, 2020.
^ "Presidential Historians Survey 2017". C-SPAN. Retrieved December 2, 2020.
^ "Presidents 2018 Rank by Category" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 20, 2019. Retrieved December 2, 2020.
^ "Richard Nixon in the U.S. Census Records". National Archives. August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2022.
^ NPS, Nixon Birthplace.
^ Ferris, p. 209.
^ Reitwiesner, William Addams. "The Ancestors of Senator John Forbes Kerry (b. 1943)". Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2016.
^ Nixon Library, Childhood.
^ Aitken, p. 11.
^ Aitken, p. 12.
^ Aitken, p. 21.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 41.
^ Aitken, p. 27.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 56 57.
^ Black, p. 16.
^ a b Morris, p. 89.
^ a b Black, pp. 17 19.
^ Morris, p. 91.
^ Morris, p. 92.
^ a b Aitken, p. 28.
^ Black, pp. 20 23.
^ Black, pp. 23 24.
^ Gellman, p. 15.
^ Black, pp. 24 25.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 61.
^ Aitken, pp. 58 63.
^ a b c d e Nixon Library, Student & Sailor.
^ a b Ambrose 1987, pp. 33 34.
^ Aitken, p. 67.
^ Parmet, p. 81.
^ Nixon Library, Family Collection Guide.
^ Aitken, p. 76.
^ Aitken, pp. 79 82.
^ a b Morris, p. 193.
^ Black, p. 44.
^ Black, p. 43.
^ Nixon 1978, p. 23.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 93, 99.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 100 101.
^ Nixon Library, Nixon Family.
^ Morris, pp. 124 126.
^ Kornitzer, pp. 143 144.
^ a b c d e f g "Naval Profiles: Richard Milhous Nixon". Naval History and Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. February 18, 2015. Archived from the original on March 15, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017. From August through December of 1944, Nixon was assigned to Fleet Air Wing EIGHT. From December through March 1945, he served at the Bureau of Aeronautics, Navy Department, Washington, D.C. In March, his next assignment was as the Bureau of Aeronautics Contracting Officer for Terminations in the Office of the Bureau of Aeronautics General Representative, Eastern District, headquartered in New York City. In that capacity, he had temporary additional duty at various places, including Washington D.C., Philadelphia, Buffalo, New York City, and East Hartford, Connecticut. He was released from active duty on March 10, 1946. He was promoted to Commander in the Naval Reserve on 1 June 1953. While on active duty besides the Letter of Commendation, Nixon earned the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal. He is entitled to two engagement stars on the Asiatic Pacific Campaign Medal for supporting air action in the Treasury Bougainville operations from October 27 to December 15, 1943, and for consolidation of the northern Solomons from December 15, 1943, to July 22, 1944. Nixon transferred to the Retired Reserve of the Naval Reserve on June 1, 1966.
^ Aitken, pp. 96 97.
^ "Official Military Personnel File for Richard M. Nixon". catalog.archives.gov. Retrieved August 21, 2022.
^ Naval Historical Center, Commander Nixon.
^ Black, pp. 58 60.
^ a b Armstrong, p. 81.
^ a b Black, p. 62.
^ Aitken, p. 112.
^ Parmet, pp. 91 96.
^ Gellman, pp. 27 28.
^ Parmet, pp. 111 113.
^ Gellman, p. 82.
^ 
"Final Report on Foreign Aid of the House Select Committee on Foreign Aid" (PDF). Marshall Foundation. May 1, 1948. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 21, 2015. Retrieved May 30, 2020.
^ Gellman, pp. 105 107, 125 126.
^ Morris, p. 365.
^ Cronin, John Francis (October 29, 1945). "The Problem of American Communism in 1945: Facts and Recommendations" (PDF). A Confidential Study for Private Circulation. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved July 26, 2017.
^ 
Ambrose, Stephen E. (March 18, 2014). Nixon Volume I: The Education of a Politician 1913 1962. Simon and Schuster. pp. 144 147. ISBN 978-1-4767-4588-6. Retrieved July 26, 2017.
^ Nixon 1978, Running for Congress: 1946.
^ "Timeline". Nixon Library. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Retrieved April 2, 2017.
^ Black, pp. 129 135.
^ Gellman, pp. 239 241.
^ Morris, p. 381.
^ Nixon Library, Congressman.
^ Gellman, p. 282.
^ Morris, p. 535.
^ Gellman, pp. 296 297.
^ Gellman, p. 304.
^ Gellman, p. 310.
^ Morris, p. 581.
^ Gellman, p. 335.
^ Gellman, p. 303.
^ a b Nixon Library, Senator.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 211, 311 312.
^ a b Black, p. 178.
^ Gellman, pp. 440 441.
^ Aitken, pp. 205 206.
^ a b Aitken, pp. 222 223.
^ John W. Malsberger, "Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and the Fund Crisis of 1952," Historian, 73 (Fall 2011), pp 526 47.
^ Kornitzer, p. 191.
^ a b c Aitken, pp. 210 217.
^ Thompson, p. 291.
^ Aitken, p. 218.
^ Morris, p. 846.
^ John W. Malsberger, The General and the Politician: Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics (2014)
^ Aitken, pp. 225 227.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 342.
^ Gellman, Irwin. "The Richard Nixon vice presidency: Research without the Nixon manuscripts" in Small, pp. 102 120.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 357 358.
^ Aitken, pp. 256 258.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 375 376.
^ Aitken, pp. 237 241.
^ Parmet, p. 294.
^ Black, pp. 349 352.
^ Black, p. 355.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 465 469.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 469 479.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 463.
^ Rabe, Stephen G. (1988). Eisenhower and Latin America: The Foreign Policy of Anticommunism. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina press. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-8078-4204-1.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 521 525.
^ UPI 1960 in Review.
^ a b c d e f g h i Nixon Library, Vice President.
^ Museum of Broadcast Communications, "Kennedy Nixon Debates".
^ Steel & 2003-05-25.
^ Costello, William (June 24, 1960). The Facts About Nixon. Viking Adult. ISBN 978-0670018918.
^ Foner, p. 843.
^ Carlson & 2000-11-17.
^ Black, p. 431.
^ Black, pp. 432 433.
^ Aitken, pp. 304 305.
^ a b Ambrose 1987, p. 673.
^ Museum of Broadcast Communications, "Smith, Howard K.".
^ Black, p. 446.
^ Aitken, pp. 297, 321.
^ Gallup, George (April 5, 1964). "42% of GOP Rank and File on Lodge Bandwagon". The Boston Globe. p. 32. Retrieved May 17, 2022.
^ Gallup, George (January 3, 1964). "Johnson Leads Nixon, 3 To 1 In Latest Presidential Poll". The Montgomery Advertiser. p. 3. Retrieved May 17, 2022.
^ "Goldwater Looks to California and Oregon Primaries as Crucial to His Chances..." The New York Times. March 12, 1964. Retrieved August 15, 2021.
^ "ROCKEFELLER WINS OREGON PRIMARY, UPSETTING LODGE..." The New York Times. May 16, 1964. Retrieved August 12, 2021.
^ Aitken, pp. 321 322.
^ Aitken, pp. 323 326.
^ a b Parmet, p. 502.
^ Morris, pp. 410 411.
^ Parmet, pp. 503 508.
^ Parmet, p. 509.
^ a b c d e f g Nixon Library, President.
^ Morrow & 1996-09-30.
^ a b Black, pp. 513 514.
^ Black, p. 550.
^ a b Schulzinger, p. 413.
^ a b "Misunderstanding a Monkey Wrench". Richard Nixon Foundation. June 2, 2017. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved November 12, 2017.
^ Nixon Tried to Spoil Johnson's Vietnam Peace Talks in '68, Notes Show Archived March 7, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, Politics Section, Peter Baker, January 2, 2017. See also H.R. Haldeman's Notes from Oct. 22, 1968 Archived February 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, December 31, 2016, which reprints four pages of Haldeman's notes.
^ Black, p. 558.
^ Azari, Julia (August 20, 2020). "Biden Had To Fight For The Presidential Nomination. But Most VPs Have To". FiveThirtyEight.
^ Evans & Novak, pp. 33 34.
^ UPI 1968 in Review.
^ Black, pp. 567 568.
^ Frick, p. 189.
^ UPI 1969 in Review.
^ a b Miller Center.
^ Ambrose 1989, p. 453.
^ Goh, Evelyn. "The China card" in Small, pp. 425 443.
^ Black, p. 778.
^ a b c d e PBS, The Nixon Visit.
^ a b c Black, pp. 780 782.
^ Ambrose 1989, p. 516.
^ Dallek, p. 300.
^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969-1976, Volume I Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1969-1972". 2001-2009.state.gov.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Vietnam War Deaths and Casualties By Month". The American War Library. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved June 22, 2012.
^ Drew, p. 65.
^ Black, p. 569.
^ Black, p. 591.
^ a b Owen, Taylor; Kiernan, Ben (October 2006). "Bombs Over Cambodia" (PDF). The Walrus. pp. 32 36. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved January 29, 2012. Kiernan and Owen later revised their estimate of 2.7 million tons of U.S. bombs dropped on Cambodia down to the previously accepted figure of roughly 500,000 tons: See Kiernan, Ben; Owen, Taylor (April 26, 2015). "Making More Enemies than We Kill? Calculating U.S. Bomb Tonnages Dropped on Laos and Cambodia, and Weighing Their Implications". The Asia-Pacific Journal. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved November 15, 2016.
^ Clymer, Kenton (2013). The United States and Cambodia, 1969 2000: A Troubled Relationship. Routledge. pp. 14 16. ISBN 978-1-134-34156-6.
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 281 283.
^ Address to the Nation on Vietnam Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine May 14, 1969
^ a b Time & 1971-04-05.
^ Mosyakov, Dmitry (2004). "The Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese Communists: A History of Their Relations as Told in the Soviet Archives".  In Cook, Susan E. (ed.). Genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda. Yale Genocide Studies Program Monograph Series. p. 54ff. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013. In April May 1970, many North Vietnamese forces entered Cambodia in response to the call for help addressed to Vietnam not by Pol Pot, but by his deputy Nuon Chea. Nguyen Co Thach recalls: 'Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days.'
^ AP/St. Peterburg Independent.
^ Gitlin, Todd (1987). The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage. Bantam Books. p. 410. ISBN 978-0-553-37212-0.
^ Safire, pp. 205 209
^ UPI/Beaver County Times & 1970-05-09.
^ Black, pp. 675 676.
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 446 448.
^ Evans.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 53 55.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 473.
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 379 383.
^ a b c Kornbluh, Peter (2003). The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability. New York: The New Press. ISBN 978-1-56584-936-5.
^ Black, p. 921.
^ a b c BBC & 1972-05-22.
^ David Tal, " 'Absolutes' and 'Stages' in the Making and Application of Nixon's SALT Policy." Diplomatic History 37.5 (2013): 1090 1116, quoting pp 1091, 1092. Nixon himself later wrote, "[W]e decided to link progress in such areas of Soviet concern as strategic arms limitation and increased trade with progress in areas that were important to us Vietnam, the Mideast, and Berlin. This concept became known as linkage." Richard Nixon (1978). RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. p. 346. ISBN 978-1-4767-3183-4.
^ Gaddis, pp. 294, 299.
^ Nixon 1985, pp. 105 106.
^ Smith, Hedrick (June 29, 1974). "OCCIDENTAL SIGNS DEAL WITH SOVIET". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 6, 2021.
^ "THE RIDDLE OF ARMAND HAMMER". The New York Times. November 29, 1981. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 6, 2021.
^ a b Rich, Spencer (October 4, 1979). "Soviets Dumping Ammonia, ITC Says". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved December 7, 2021.
^ "NIXON IN APPEAL ON SOVIET TRADE". The New York Times. October 5, 1973. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 7, 2021.
^ Herring, George C. (2008). From Colony to Superpower; U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776. Oxford University Press. p. 804. ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0.
^ a b c d Black, p. 963.
^ a b c Hanhim ki, Jussi M. "Foreign Policy Overview" in Small, pp. 345 361.
^ "DEFCON DEFense CONdition". fas.org. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015.
^ Nixon 1978, pp. 938 940.
^ Black, pp. 923 928.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 311.
^ Tyler, Patrick (2010), p. 161
^ Black, pp. 951 952, 959.
^ a b Ambrose 1989, pp. 225 226.
^ a b Ambrose 1989, pp. 431 432.
^ a b c Bowles, Nigel. "Economic Policy" in Small, pp. 235 251.
^ a b Oatley, Thomas (2019). International Political Economy: Sixth Edition. Routledge. pp. 351 352. ISBN 978-1-351-03464-7.
^ Gowa, Joanne (1983). Closing the Gold Window. Cornell University Press. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-1622-4. JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctvr7f40n.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ a b Aitken, pp. 399 400.
^ a b c d Hetzel, p. 92.
^ Aitken, p. 395.
^ USPS, Periodicals postage.
^ a b Aitken, pp. 397 398.
^ a b c Rinde, Meir (2017). "Richard Nixon and the Rise of American Environmentalism". Distillations. Vol. 3, no. 1. pp. 16 29. Archived from the original on April 5, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
^ Aitken, p. 396.
^ NHI: CQ Almanac 1971.
^ a b HMO: CQ Almanac 1973.
^ NHI: CQ Almanac 1974.
^ Ambrose 1989, p. 418.
^ Office of the Federal Register, pp. 179 182.
^ The American Presidency Project.
^ National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, p. 2.
^ Wailoo, pp. 165, 170.
^ Boger, p. 6.
^ Sabia.
^ Parmet, pp. 595 597, 603.
^ "The Republican Reversal James Morton Turner, Andrew C. Isenberg | Harvard University Press". www.hup.harvard.edu. p. 36. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved July 31, 2019.
^ The Partisan Sort. Chicago Studies in American Politics. University of Chicago Press. p. 24. Archived from the original on July 31, 2019. Retrieved July 31, 2019.
^ Delaney & 1970-07-20.
^ Frum, p. 246.
^ Frazier, Nishani (2017). Harambee City: Congress of Racial Equality in Cleveland and the Rise of Black Power Populism. University of Arkansas Press. pp. 184 207. ISBN 978-1-68226-018-0.
^ PBS, Nixon, Domestic Politics.
^ Parmet, p. 563.
^ Handlin.
^ Hepplewhite, pp. 204 205, ch. 5.
^ "MIT lecture notes in "Aircraft Systems Engineering," fall 2005, on early Space Shuttle policy" (PDF). Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Fall 2005. p. 7. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
^ Ezell, p. 192, ch. 6 11.
^ a b Mason, Robert "Political realignment" in Small, pp. 252 269.
^ a b Black, p. 766.
^ Black, p. 795.
^ Black, p. 617.
^ Black, p. 816.
^ Black, p. 834.
^ White, p. 123.
^ Time & 1972-08-14.
^ Time & 1970-11-20.
^ Parmet, p. 629.
^ The Washington Post, The Post Investigates.
^ a b c The Washington Post, The Government Acts.
^ Aitken, pp. 511 512.
^ a b c The Washington Post, Nixon Resigns.
^ Aitken, p. 555.
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 231 232, 239.
^ Beckmann, Matthew N. (April 1, 2017). "Did Nixon quit before he resigned?". Research & Politics. 4 (2): 2053168017704800. doi:10.1177/2053168017704800. ISSN 2053-1680.
^ Frum, p. 26.
^ Kilpatrick & 1973-11-18.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 394 395.
^ Samson.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 414 416.
^ Black, p. 978.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 435 436.
^ PBS, Resignation Speech.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 437.
^ Black, p. 983.
^ a b c d e f Nixon Library, Post Presidency.
^ a b Aitken, p. 529.
^ Aitken, pp. 529 530.
^ Aitken, p. 532.
^ Black, p. 990.
^ Aitken, pp. 533 534.
^ Black, pp. 994, 999.
^ Black, p. 998.
^ Aitken, p. 535.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 481.
^ Aitken, pp. 537, 539.
^ Black, p. 1000.
^ Black, p. 1004.
^ Drew, p. 138.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 512.
^ Aitken, pp. 539 540.
^ Black, p. 1005.
^ Aitken, p. 543.
^ "Nixon disbarred in New York in 1st ruling of Watergate guilt", Toledo Blade, July 9, 1976, p.1
^ L, Stephen; rigan (December 1, 1978). "Protesters Heckle Nixon at Oxford Opponents of Oxford Speech Cool Nixon's Warm Welcome". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved January 3, 2022.
^ Reed, Roy (December 1, 1978). "Welcome For Nixon At Oxford Is Warm". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 3, 2022.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 525.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 524 525.
^ "Nixons Buy Fifth Avenue Condo in N.Y." Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. August 11, 1979. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 528.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 533.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 534.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 540.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 545.
^ Drew, p. 142.
^ a b Drew, p. 144.
^ Aitken, pp. 561 562.
^ Aitken, pp. 565 568.
^ Black, pp. 1045 1046.
^ "Nixon Center Becomes Center for the National Interest" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Center for the National Interest. PR Newswire. March 9, 2011. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved September 9, 2018.
^ Black, pp. 1049 1050.
^ a b c d Weil & Randolph & 1994-04-23.
^ Altman, Lawrence K. (April 24, 1994). "THE 37TH PRESIDENT: THE LAST DAYS; Disabled, Yet Retaining Control Over His Care". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 17, 2016. Retrieved February 12, 2016.
^ Black, pp. 1051 1053.
^ BBC & 2004-06-11.
^ The Deseret News & 1994-04-27.
^ Frick, p. 206.
^ Stacks & 1994-05-02.
^ Wicker & 1994-04-24.
^ Sawhill & 2011-02.
^ Frick, pp. 205 206.
^ Frick, pp. 204 205.
^ Frick, p. 210.
^ a b Thompson, Hunter S. (July 1994). "He Was a Crook". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on June 7, 2017. Retrieved June 4, 2017.
^ Skidmore, p. 495.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 592.
^ Gellman, p. 460.
^ Aitken, p. 577.
^ Black, p. 1053.
^ Parmet, p. viii.
^ Milazzo, Paul Charles. "Nixon and the Environment" in Small, pp. 270 291.
^ Greider & 1983-10-10.
^ Shawn, Eric (March 3, 2021). "Kissinger says Trump, Nixon foreign policies similar, warns Biden on Iran". Fox News. Retrieved March 4, 2021.
^ Andrew 1995, p. 384.
^ a b Olson, Keith W. "Watergate" in Small, pp. 481 496.
^ Rottinghaus, Brandon; Vaughn, Justin S. (February 19, 2018). "How Does Trump Stack Up Against the Best and Worst Presidents?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 5, 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2018.
^ "Presidential Historians Survey 2017". C-Span. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
^ "Siena's 6th Presidential Expert Poll 1982 2018". Siena College Research Institute. February 13, 2019. Archived from the original on July 19, 2019. Retrieved July 19, 2019.
^ Frick, pp. 211 214.
^ Reeves, pp. 281 283.
^ Drew, p. 150.
^ Black, p. 574.
^ Black, p. 700.
^ "The Year Nixon Fell Apart". Politico. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019.
^ "David Owen: Lessons in removing politicians from public office". The Independent. August 12, 2008. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019.
^ Boseley, Sarah (March 28, 2009). "A doctor writes: Politicians' pride is a medical disorder". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019.
^ Drew, p. 151.
^ Reeves, p. 12.
^ Reeves, p. 13.
^ "New tapes reveal depth of Nixon's anti-Semitism". The Washington Post, October 6, 1999. Retrieved on April 4, 2011.
^ a b c Noah, Timothy. "Nixon: I Am Not an Anti-Semite". Slate, October 7, 1999. Retrieved on July 17, 2011.
^ a b Greene.
Print sources
Aitken, Jonathan (1996). Nixon: A Life. Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89526-720-7.
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1987). Nixon: The Education of a Politician 1913 1962. Vol. I. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-52836-2.
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1989). Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician 1962 1972. Vol. II. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-72506-8.
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1991). Nixon: Ruin and Recovery 1973 1990. Vol. III. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-69188-2.
Andrew, Christopher (1995). For the President's Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-092178-1.
Armstrong, William M. (2017). Marine Air Group 25 and SCAT. Charleston: Arcadia. ISBN 978-1-46712-743-1.
Black, Conrad (2007). Richard M. Nixon: A Life in Full. New York: PublicAffairs Books. ISBN 978-1-58648-519-1.
Blythe, Will (2006). To Hate Like This is to be Happy Forever. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-074023-8.
Boger, John Charles (2005). School Resegregation: Must the South Turn Back?. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-5613-0.
Dallek, Robert (2007). Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-072230-2.
Drew, Elizabeth (2007). Richard M. Nixon. The American Presidents Series. New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-6963-1.
Evans, Rowland; Novak, Robert (1971). Nixon in the White House: The Frustration of Power. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-394-46273-8.
Ezell, Edward Clinton; Ezell, Linda Neuman (1978). The Partnership: A History of the Apollo Soyuz Test Project. Washington D.C.: NASA History Office.
Farrell, John A. (2017). Richard Nixon: The Life. Penguin Random House. ISBN 9780345804969. Retrieved March 2, 2023.
Ferris, Gary W. (1999). Presidential Places: A Guide to the Historic Sites of the U.S. Presidents. Winston-Salem, N.C.: John F. Blair. ISBN 978-0-89587-176-3.
Foner, Eric (2006). Give Me Liberty!: An American History. Vol. 2. New York: W. W. Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0-393-92784-9.
Frick, Daniel (2008). Reinventing Richard Nixon. Lawrence, Kans.: University of Kansas Press. ISBN 978-0-7006-1599-5.
Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4.
Gaddis, John Lewis (1982). Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National Security Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-503097-6.
Gellman, Irwin (1999). The Contender. New York: The Free Press. ISBN 978-1-4165-7255-8.
Greenberg, David. Nixon's Shadow: The History of an Image (2003). Important study of how Nixon was perceived by media and scholars.
Hall, Mitchell K. ed. Historical Dictionary of the Nixon-Ford Era (2008) 285pp
Hepplewhite, T.A. (1999). The Space Shuttle Decision: NASA's Search for a Reusable Space Vehicle. Washington D.C.: NASA History Office.
Hetzel, Robert L. (2008). The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88132-6.
Ingle, H. Larry (2015). Nixon's First Cover-up: The Religious Life of a Quaker President. Columbia, Missouri: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0-8262-2042-4.
Kornitzer, Bela (1960). The Real Nixon: An Intimate Biography. New York: Rand McNally & Company.
Langguth, A.J. (2000). Our Vietnam: The War 1954 1975. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 524. ISBN 978-0-7432-1244-1.
Malsberger, John W. The General and the Politician: Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics (2014)
Merkley, Paul Charles (2004). American Presidents, Religion, and Israel: the Heirs of Cyrus. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-98340-6.
Morris, Roger (1990). Richard Milhous Nixon: The Rise of an American Politician. New York: Henry Holt & Co. ISBN 978-0-8050-1834-9.
Nixon, Richard (1978). RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. New York: Grosset & Dunlap. ISBN 978-0-448-14374-3.
Nixon, Richard (1985). No More Vietnams. Westminster, Md.: Arbor House Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-87795-668-6.
Parmet, Herbert S. (1990). Richard Nixon and His America. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. ISBN 978-0-316-69232-8.
Perlstein, Richard (2008). Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-7432-4302-5.
Reeves, Richard (2001). President Nixon: Alone in the White House. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-80231-2.
Safire, William (2005) [1975]. Before The Fall: An Insider View of the Pre-Watergate White House, with a 2005 Preface by the Author. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4128-0466-0. Originally published: Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1975 (new material 2005)
Small, Melvin, ed. (2011). A Companion to Richard M. Nixon. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4443-3017-5.; Emphasis on historiography
Schulzinger, Robert D. (2003). A Companion to American Foreign Relations. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-4986-0.
Thompson, John B. (2000). Political Scandal: Power and Visibility in the Media Age. Cambridge: Polity Press. ISBN 978-0-7456-2550-8.
Tyler, Patrick (2010). A World of Trouble: The White House and the Middle East from the Cold War to the War on Terror. New York: Macmillan.
White, Theodore H. (1973). The Making of the President 1972. New York: Antheneum. ISBN 978-0-689-10553-1.
Nixon Library
"Childhood". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"A Student & Sailor". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"The Nixon Family". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"The Congressman". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"The Senator". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on February 16, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"The Vice President". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"The President". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"Post Presidency". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2012.
Lee, Meghan (June 22, 2004). "Guide to the Nixon Family Collection (1909 1967)" (PDF). Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum.
Other sources
"1972: President Nixon arrives in Moscow". BBC. June 11, 2004. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"Reagan funeral: Schedule of events". BBC. June 11, 2004. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
Delaney, Paul (July 20, 1970). "Nixon Plan for Negro Construction Jobs Is Lagging". The New York Times. p. 1.
"Mourners pay last respects to Nixon". The Deseret News. April 27, 1994. p. 1. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Steel, Ronald (May 25, 2003). "The World: New Chapter, Old Debate; Would Kennedy Have Quit Vietnam?". The New York Times. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
Wicker, Tom (April 24, 1994). "From afar: An indomitable man, an incurable loneliness". The New York Times. Retrieved August 7, 2011.
Kilpatrick, Carroll (November 18, 1973). "Nixon tells editors, 'I'm not a crook'". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"The Post Investigates". The Washington Post. The Watergate Story. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"The Government Acts". The Washington Post. The Watergate Story. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"Nixon Resigns". The Washington Post. The Watergate Story. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Weil, Martin; Randolph, Eleanor (April 23, 1994). "Richard M. Nixon, 37th President, dies". The Washington Post. p. A01. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Lardner, George Jr.; Dobbs, Michael (October 6, 1999). "New tapes reveal depth of Nixon's anti-Semitism". The Washington Post. p. A31. Retrieved April 4, 2011.
Carlson, Peter (November 17, 2000). "Another Race to the Finish". The Washington Post. p. A01.
"8,000 Move Into Cambodia". St. Petersburg Independent. AP (Saigon). May 1, 1970. p. 20 A.
"Nixon Up Early, See Protesters". Beaver County Times. Pennsylvania. UPI. May 9, 1970. p. one [presumably late edition].
Greene, Bob (April 8, 2002). "What Nixon's best friend couldn't buy". Jewish World Review. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Greider, William (November 10, 1983). "The McGovern factor". Rolling Stone. p. 13.
Kiernan, Ben; Owen, Taylor (October 2006). "Bombs over Cambodia" (PDF). The Walrus. Retrieved January 29, 2012.
Noah, Timothy (October 7, 1999). "Nixon: I Am Not an Anti-Semite". Slate. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
Sawhill, Ray (February 2011). "The Fall and Rise of an American President". Opera News. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"Again, the Credibility Gap?". Time. April 5, 1971. Archived from the original on December 21, 2008. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
"Behavior: Evaluating Eagleton". Time. August 14, 1972. Archived from the original on January 2, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2011.
"Democrats: The long journey to disaster". Time. November 20, 1972. Archived from the original on April 21, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2011.
Skidmore, Max J. (2001). "Ranking and Evaluating Presidents: The Case of Theodore Roosevelt". White House Studies. 1 (4).
Stacks, John F. (May 2, 1994). "Richard Nixon: Victory in Defeat". Time. Archived from the original on January 22, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Morrow, Lance (September 30, 1996). "Naysayer to the nattering nabobs". Time. Archived from the original on November 10, 2006. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Allen, Erika Tyler. "The Kennedy Nixon Presidential Debates, 1960". The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
Auster, Albert. "Smith, Howard K". The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on August 5, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
Evans, Thomas W. (1993). "The All-Volunteer Army After Twenty Years: Recruiting in the Modern Era". Sam Houston State University. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
Handlin, Daniel (November 28, 2005). "Just another Apollo? Part two". The Space Review. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"American President: Richard Milhous Nixon (1913 1994), Foreign Affairs". Miller Center for Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"Richard M. Nixon Birthplace". National Park Service. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
"Commander Richard M. Nixon, USNR". Naval Historical Center. United States Navy. August 7, 2006. Archived from the original on August 16, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Nixon, Richard (August 8, 1974). "President Nixon's Resignation Speech". Character Above All. Public Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved July 15, 2011.
"The Nixon Visit (February 21 28, 1972)". American Experience. Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"Richard M. Nixon, Domestic Politics". American Experience. Public Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on May 23, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
Sabia, Joseph J. (May 31, 2004). "Why Richard Nixon Deserves to Be Remembered Along with Brown". History News Network. Retrieved May 11, 2012.
"Kennedy Wins 1960 Presidential Election". 1960 Year In Review. United Press International. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
"1968 Presidential Election". 1968 Year in Review. United Press International. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"Nixon Becomes President". 1969 Year in Review. United Press International. Retrieved July 16, 2011.
"Postage rates for periodicals: A narrative history" (PDF). United States Postal Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 30, 2013. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
Office of the Federal Register (1999). "New Actions To Prevent Illnesses And Accidents". Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Richard Nixon, 1971. National Archives and Records Service. General Services Administration. ISBN 978-0-16-058863-1.
"Statement on Signing the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act". The American Presidency Project. University of California, Santa Barbara. May 16, 1972.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (September 2002). "Sickle Cell Research for Treatment and Cure" (PDF). National Institutes of Health. 02-5214. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 31, 2012.
Wailoo, Keith (2001). Dying in the City of the Blues: Sickle Cell Anemia and the Politics of Race and Health. University of North Carolina Press. p. 165. ISBN 978-0-8078-4896-8.
"Health insurance: hearings on new proposals". Congressional Quarterly Almanac. 92nd Congress 1st Session ... 1971. Congressional Quarterly Almanac Plus. Vol. 27. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly. 1972. pp. 541 544. ISSN 0095-6007. OCLC 1564784.
"Limited experimental health bill enacted". Congressional Quarterly Almanac. 93rd Congress 1st Session ... 1973. Congressional Quarterly Almanac Plus. Vol. 29. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly. 1974. pp. 499 508. ISSN 0095-6007. OCLC 1564784.
"National health insurance: no action in 1974". Congressional Quarterly Almanac. 93rd Congress 2nd Session ... 1974. Congressional Quarterly Almanac Plus. Vol. 30. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly. 1975. pp. 386 394. ISSN 0095-6007. OCLC 1564784.
Samson, William (2005). "President Nixon's Troublesome Tax Returns". TaxAnalysts. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
Grier, Peter (2011). "Tax Day 2011: Why do presidents release tax returns?". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
Further reading
Li, Victor (2018). Nixon in New York: How Wall Street Helped Richard Nixon Win the White House. Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. ISBN 978-1-68393-000-6.
Thomas, Evan (2015). Being Nixon: A Man Divided. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-9536-7. OCLC 904756092.
External links
Richard Nixon  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Official websites
White House biography
Nixon Presidential Library and Museum
Richard Nixon Foundation
Media coverage
Richard Nixon collected news and commentary at The New York Times 
Appearances on C-SPAN 
"Life Portrait of Richard M. Nixon", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, November 19, 1999
Other
United States Congress. "Richard Nixon (id: N000116)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
Essays on Richard Nixon, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
Richard Nixon: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
"The Presidents: Nixon", an American Experience documentary
Works by or about Richard Nixon at Internet Archive
Works by Richard Nixon at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Richard Nixon Personal Manuscripts
Richard Nixon at IMDb 
Works by Richard Nixon at Project Gutenberg
vteRichard Nixon
37th President of the United States (1969 1974)
36th Vice President of the United States (1953 1961)
U.S. Senator from California (1950 1953)
U.S. Representative for CA 12 (1947 1950)
Pre-presidency
Checkers speech
Vice presidency
Presidential transition of Dwight D. Eisenhower
1958 motorcade attack
Kitchen Debate
Operation 40
Presidential transition of John F. Kennedy
Presidency
Transition
First inauguration
Second inauguration
Nixon Doctrine
"Bring Us Together"
Economic policies
Bank Secrecy Act
Fair Credit Reporting Act
Family Assistance Plan
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973
Nixon shock
Revised Philadelphia Plan
Smithsonian Agreement
Tar Baby Option
Education Amendments of 1972
Title IX
Council on Environmental Quality
Environmental Quality Improvement Act
National Environmental Policy Act
Environmental Protection Agency
Clean Air Amendments of 1970
Clean Water Act
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
National Ambient Air Quality Standards
National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
New Source Performance Standards
Noise Control Act
Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1970
Occupational Safety and Health Act
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Permissible exposure limit
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
Consumer Product Safety Act
Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act
Poison Prevention Packaging Act of 1970
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Space exploration
1971 National Cancer Act
Vietnam War
Cambodian bombing
Paris Peace Accords
"Peace with Honor"
Vietnamization
Silent majority
Cold War period
Linkage policy
Drug  Abuse Prevention and Control Act
1970 Lincoln Memorial visit
1972 visit to China
Shanghai Communiqu 
D tente
1972 Moscow Summit
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
SALT I Treaty
Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement
Threshold Test Ban Treaty
Endangered Species Act
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse
War on Drugs
Drug Enforcement Administration
Cannabis policy
Enemies List
list of opponents
Operation CHAOS
Watergate
timeline
White House tapes
United States v. Nixon
Senate Watergate Committee
impeachment process
"I am not a crook"
Resignation
speech
Pardon
State of the Union Address (1970
1973
1974)
Wilson desk
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
controversies
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Life andpolitics
Richard Nixon Foundation
Presidential Library and Museum
Birthplace and boyhood home
"Last press conference"
Florida White House
"La Casa Pacifica"
Nixon Center
Nixon v. General Services Administration
Death and state funeral
Books
Six Crises (1962)
Bibliography
Elections
U.S. House of Representatives: 1946
1948
U.S. Senate: 1950
California gubernatorial election: 1962
GOP presidential primaries: 1960
1964
1968
1972
GOP national conventions: 1952
1956
1960
1968
campaign
1972
Presidential elections: 1952
1956
1960
debates
1968
1972
Popularculture
"Nixon goes to China"
Millhouse (1971 film)
An Evening with Richard Nixon (1972 play)
Richard (1972 film)
Another Nice Mess (1972 film)
Four More Years (1972 film)
Impeach the President (1973 song)
The Werewolf of Washington (1973 film)
White House Madness (1975 film)
All the President's Men (1976 film)
The Public Burning (1977 novel)
Washington: Behind Closed Doors (1977 miniseries)
Secret Honor (1984 film)
Nixon in China (1987 opera)
The Final Days (1989 film)
Nixon (1995 film)
Elvis Meets Nixon (1997 film)
Futurama (1999 TV series)
Dick (1999 film)
Nixon's China Game (2000 film)
Dark Side of the Moon (2002 film)
The Assassination of Richard Nixon (2004 film)
Frost Nixon interviews (2006 play, 2008 film)
Black Dynamite (2009 film)
"The Impossible Astronaut" (2011 TV episode)
Our Nixon (2013 film)
X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014 film)
Crooked (2015 novel)
Elvis & Nixon (2016 film)
The Post (2017 film)
Watergate (2019 board game)
U.S. postage stamp
Related
Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act
Presidential Townhouse
Richard Nixon mask
Staff
Jack Brennan (aide de camp)
Murray Chotiner (early campaign manager)
Manolo Sanchez (valet)
Rose Mary Woods (secretary)
Family
Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife)
Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter)
Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter)
Christopher Nixon Cox (grandson)
Jennie Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Francis A. Nixon (father)
Hannah Milhous Nixon (mother)
Donald Nixon (brother)
Edward Nixon (brother)
  Lyndon B. Johnson
Gerald Ford  
  Alben W. Barkley
Lyndon B. Johnson  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
U.S. House of Representatives
Preceded byJerry Voorhis
 Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from California's 12th congressional district 1947 1950
Succeeded byPatrick J. Hillings
U.S. Senate
Preceded bySheridan Downey
 United States Senator (Class 3) from California 1950 1953        Served alongside: William Knowland
Succeeded byThomas Kuchel
Party political offices
Preceded byFrederick F. Houser
 Republican nominee for U.S. Senator from California(Class 3) 1950
Succeeded byThomas Kuchel
Preceded byEarl Warren
 Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1952, 1956
Succeeded byHenry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Preceded byDwight D. Eisenhower
 Republican nominee for President of the United States 1960
Succeeded byBarry Goldwater
Preceded byWilliam F. Knowland
 Republican nominee for Governor of California 1962
Succeeded byRonald Reagan
Preceded byBarry Goldwater
 Republican nominee for President of the United States 1968, 1972
Succeeded byGerald Ford
Political offices
Preceded byAlben W. Barkley
 Vice President of the United States 1953 1961
Succeeded byLyndon B. Johnson
Preceded byLyndon B. Johnson
 President of the United States 1969 1974
Succeeded byGerald Ford
Articles related to Richard Nixon
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteVice presidents of the United States
John Adams (1789 1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797 1801)
Aaron Burr (1801 1805)
George Clinton (1805 1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813 1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817 1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825 1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833 1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837 1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845 1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849 1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857 1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869 1873)
Henry Wilson (1873 1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877 1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889 1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893 1897)
Garret Hobart (1897 1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905 1909)
James S. Sherman (1909 1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913 1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921 1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925 1929)
Charles Curtis (1929 1933)
John N. Garner (1933 1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949 1953)
Richard Nixon (1953 1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961 1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965 1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969 1973)
Gerald Ford (1973 1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974 1977)
Walter Mondale (1977 1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981 1989)
Dan Quayle (1989 1993)
Al Gore (1993 2001)
Dick Cheney (2001 2009)
Joe Biden (2009 2017)
Mike Pence (2017 2021)
Kamala Harris (2021 present)
 Category
 Commons
 List
vteUnsuccessful major party candidates for President of the United States
Thomas Jefferson (1796)
John Adams (1800)
Charles C. Pinckney (1804, 1808)
DeWitt Clinton (1812)
Rufus King (1816)
Andrew Jackson (1824)
William H. Crawford (1824)
Henry Clay (1824, 1832, 1844)
John Quincy Adams (1828)
William Henry Harrison (1836)
Hugh Lawson White (1836)
Martin Van Buren (1840)
Lewis Cass (1848)
Winfield Scott (1852)
John C. Fr mont (1856)
Stephen A. Douglas (1860)
George B. McClellan (1864)
Horatio Seymour (1868)
Horace Greeley (1872)
Samuel J. Tilden (1876)
Winfield Scott Hancock (1880)
James G. Blaine (1884)
Grover Cleveland (1888)
Benjamin Harrison (1892)
William J. Bryan (1896, 1900, 1908)
Alton B. Parker (1904)
William Howard Taft (1912)
Charles Evans Hughes (1916)
James M. Cox (1920)
John W. Davis (1924)
Al Smith (1928)
Herbert Hoover (1932)
Alf Landon (1936)
Wendell Willkie (1940)
Thomas E. Dewey (1944, 1948)
Adlai Stevenson (1952, 1956)
Richard Nixon (1960)
Barry Goldwater (1964)
Hubert Humphrey (1968)
George McGovern (1972)
Gerald Ford (1976)
Jimmy Carter (1980)
Walter Mondale (1984)
Michael Dukakis (1988)
George H. W. Bush (1992)
Bob Dole (1996)
Al Gore (2000)
John Kerry (2004)
John McCain (2008)
Mitt Romney (2012)
Hillary Clinton (2016)
Donald Trump (2020)
 All presidential candidates
 Presidents
 Third party candidates
vteCabinet of President Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)CabinetVice President
Richard Nixon (1953 1961)
Secretary of State
John Foster Dulles (1953 1959)
Christian Herter (1959 1961)
Secretary of the Treasury
George M. Humphrey (1953 1957)
Robert B. Anderson (1957 1961)
Secretary of Defense
Charles Erwin Wilson (1953 1957)
Neil H. McElroy (1957 1959)
Thomas S. Gates Jr. (1959 1961)
Attorney General
Herbert Brownell Jr. (1953 1957)
William P. Rogers (1957 1961)
Postmaster General
Arthur Summerfield (1953 1961)
Secretary of the Interior
Douglas McKay (1953 1956)
Fred A. Seaton (1956 1961)
Secretary of Agriculture
Ezra Taft Benson (1953 1961)
Secretary of Commerce
Sinclair Weeks (1953 1958)
Frederick H. Mueller (1959 1961)
Secretary of Labor
Martin Patrick Durkin (1953)
James P. Mitchell (1953 1961)
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
Oveta Culp Hobby (1953 1955)
Marion B. Folsom (1955 1958)
Arthur Flemming (1958 1961)
Cabinet-levelDirector of the Bureau of the Budget
Joseph Dodge (1953 1954)
Rowland Hughes (1954 1956)
Percival Brundage (1956 1958)
Maurice Stans (1958 1961)
Ambassador to the United Nations
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. (1953 1960)
James Jeremiah Wadsworth (1960 1961)
Director of the Mutual Security Agency
Harold Stassen (1953)
Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization
Arthur Flemming (1953 1957)
Gordon Gray (1957 1958)
Administrator of the Federal Civil Defense Administration
Val Peterson (1953 1957)
Leo Hoegh (1957 1958)
Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Leo Hoegh (1958 1961)
Chair of the Atomic Energy Commission
John A. McCone (1958 1961)
White House Chief of Staff
Sherman Adams (1953 1958)
Wilton Persons (1958 1961)
White House Deputy Chief of Staff
Wilton Persons (1953 1958)
Gerald D. Morgan (1958 1961)
White House Cabinet Secretary
Maxwell M. Rabb (1954 1958)
Robert Keith Gray (1958 1961)
vteRepublican Party
History
National Union Party
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Presidentialticketsandnationalconventions
1856 (Philadelphia): Fr mont/Dayton
1860 (Chicago): Lincoln/Hamlin
1864 (Baltimore): Lincoln/Johnson
1868 (Chicago): Grant/Colfax
1872 (Philadelphia): Grant/Wilson
1876 (Cincinnati): Hayes/Wheeler
1880 (Chicago): Garfield/Arthur
1884 (Chicago): Blaine/Logan
1888 (Chicago): Harrison/Morton
1892 (Minneapolis): Harrison/Reid
1896 (Saint Louis): McKinley/Hobart
1900 (Philadelphia): McKinley/Roosevelt
1904 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Fairbanks
1908 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman
1912 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman/Butler
1916 (Chicago): Hughes/Fairbanks
1920 (Chicago): Harding/Coolidge
1924 (Cleveland): Coolidge/Dawes
1928 (Kansas City): Hoover/Curtis
1932 (Chicago): Hoover/Curtis
1936 (Cleveland): Landon/Knox
1940 (Philadelphia): Willkie/McNary
1944 (Chicago): Dewey/Bricker
1948 (Philadelphia): Dewey/Warren
1952 (Chicago): Eisenhower/Nixon
1956 (San Francisco): Eisenhower/Nixon
1960 (Chicago): Nixon/Lodge
1964 (San Francisco): Goldwater/Miller
1968 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1972 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1976 (Kansas City): Ford/Dole
1980 (Detroit): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1984 (Dallas): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1988 (New Orleans): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1992 (Houston): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1996 (San Diego): Dole/Kemp
2000 (Philadelphia): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2004 (New York): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2008 (St. Paul): McCain/Palin
2012 (Tampa): Romney/Ryan
2016 (Cleveland): Trump/Pence
2020 (Charlotte/other locations): Trump/Pence
2024 (Milwaukee)
Presidentialadministrations
Lincoln (1861 1865)
Johnson (1865 1868)
Grant (1869 1877)
Hayes (1877 1881)
Garfield (1881)
Arthur (1881 1885)
Harrison (1889 1893)
McKinley (1897 1901)
Roosevelt (1901 1909)
Taft (1909 1913)
Harding (1921 1923)
Coolidge (1923 1929)
Hoover (1929 1933)
Eisenhower (1953 1961)
Nixon (1969 1974)
Ford (1974 1977)
Reagan (1981 1989)
G. H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
G. W. Bush (2001 2009)
Trump (2017 2021)
U.S. SenateleadersandConferencechairs
J. P. Hale (1859 1862)
Anthony (1862 1884)
Sherman (1884 1885)
Edmunds (1885 1891)
Sherman (1891 1897)
Allison (1897 1908)
E. Hale (1908 1911)
Cullom (1911 1913)
Gallinger (1913 1918)
Lodge (1918 1924)
Curtis (1924 1929)
Watson (1929 1933)
McNary (1933 1940)
Austin (1940 1941)
McNary (1941 1944)
White (1944 1949)
Wherry (1949 1952)
Bridges (1952 1953)
Taft (1953)
Knowland (1953 1959)
Dirksen (1959 1969)
Scott (1969 1977)
Baker (1977 1979)
Stevens (1979 1980)
Baker (1980 1985)
Dole (1985 1996)
Lott (1996 2003)
Frist (2003 2007)
McConnell (2007 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andConferencechairs
Pennington (1860 1861)
Grow (1861 1863)
Colfax (1863 1869)
Pomeroy (1869)
Blaine (1869 1875)
McCrary (1875 1877)
Hale (1877 1879)
Frye (1879 1881)
Keifer (1881 1883)
Cannon (1883 1889)
Reed (1889 1891)
T. J. Henderson (1891 1895)
Reed (1895 1899)
D. B. Henderson (1899 1903)
Cannon (1903 1911)
Mann (1911 1919)
Gillett (1919 1925)
Longworth (1925 1931)
Snell (1931 1939)
Martin (1939 1959)
Halleck (1959 1965)
Ford (1965 1973)
Rhodes (1973 1981)
Michel (1981 1995)
Gingrich (1995 1999)
Hastert (1999 2007)
Boehner (2007 2015)
Ryan (2015 2019)
McCarthy (2019 )
RNCChairs
Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Campbell
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Mart nez/Duncan
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
McDaniel
Chair elections
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Parties bystate andterritoryState
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Territory
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Affiliated  organizationsFundraisinggroups
National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Redistricting Trust
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Governors Association
Sectionalgroups
College Republicans
Chairmen
Congressional Hispanic Conference
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans
Republicans Overseas
Factionalgroups
Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
Republican Governance Group
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List
Related
Primaries
Debates
Bibliography
International Democrat Union
Timeline of modern American conservatism
Trumpism
vteUnited States senators from CaliforniaClass 1
Fr mont
Weller
Broderick
Haun
Latham
Conness
Casserly
Hager
Booth
Miller
Hearst
Williams
Hearst
Felton
White
Bard
Flint
Works
Johnson
Knowland
Engle
Salinger
Murphy
Tunney
Hayakawa
Wilson
Seymour
Feinstein
Class 3
Gwin
McDougall
Cole
Sargent
Farley
Stanford
Perkins
Phelan
Shortridge
McAdoo
Storke
Downey
Nixon
Kuchel
Cranston
Boxer
Harris
Padilla
vteCalifornia's delegation(s) to the 80th 82nd United States Congress (ordered by seniority)
80th
Senate: 
 S. Downey (D)
 W. Knowland (R)
House: 
 C. Lea (D)
 R. Welch (R)
 B. Gearhart (R)
 A. Elliott (D)
 F. Havenner (D)
 H. Sheppard (D)
 J. Anderson (R)
 J. Hinshaw (R)
 C. King (D)
 J. L. Johnson (R)
 C. Holifield (D)
 J. Phillips (R)
 C. Engle (D)
 W. Bradley (R)
 H. Gahagan Douglas (D)
 G. McDonough (R)
 G. P. Miller (D)
 J. Allen (R)
 E. Bramblett (R)
 D. Jackson (R)
 R. Nixon (R)
 N. Poulson (R)
 C. Fletcher (R)
81st
Senate: 
 S. Downey (D)
 W. Knowland (R)
 R. Nixon (R)
House: 
 R. Welch (R)
 F. Havenner (D)
 H. Sheppard (D)
 J. Anderson (R)
 J. Hinshaw (R)
 C. King (D)
 J. L. Johnson (R)
 C. Holifield (D)
 J. Phillips (R)
 C. Engle (D)
 H. Gahagan Douglas (D)
 G. McDonough (R)
 G. P. Miller (D)
 J. Allen (R)
 E. Bramblett (R)
 D. Jackson (R)
 R. Nixon (R)
 N. Poulson (R)
 C. Doyle (D)
 C. McKinnon (D)
 H. Scudder (R)
 T. Werdel (R)
 C. White (D)
 J. Shelley (D)
82nd
Senate: 
 W. Knowland (R)
 R. Nixon (R)
 T. Kuchel (R)
House: 
 F. Havenner (D)
 H. Sheppard (D)
 J. Anderson (R)
 J. Hinshaw (R)
 C. King (D)
 J. L. Johnson (R)
 C. Holifield (D)
 J. Phillips (R)
 C. Engle (D)
 G. McDonough (R)
 G. P. Miller (D)
 J. Allen (R)
 E. Bramblett (R)
 D. Jackson (R)
 N. Poulson (R)
 C. Doyle (D)
 C. McKinnon (D)
 H. Scudder (R)
 T. Werdel (R)
 J. Shelley (D)
 P. Hillings (R)
 A. Hunter (R)
 S. Yorty (D)
vte(  1948)   1952 United States presidential election   (  1956)Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower
VP nominee: Richard Nixon
Other candidates: Riley A. Bender
George T. Mickelson
Harold Stassen
Robert Taft
Earl Warren
Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II
VP nominee: John Sparkman
Other candidates: Alben W. Barkley
Paul A. Dever
W. Averell Harriman
Hubert Humphrey
Estes Kefauver
Robert S. Kerr
Richard Russell Jr.
Third party and independent candidatesProhibition Party
Nominee: Stuart Hamblen 
VP nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick
Progressive Party
Nominee: Vincent Hallinan
VP nominee: Charlotta Bass
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Eric Hass 
Socialist Party
Nominee: Darlington Hoopes
VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
Edward Longstreet Bodin
Henry B. Krajewski
Homer Aubrey Tomlinson
Other 1952 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1952)   1956 United States presidential election   (  1960)Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower
Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon
Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II
VP nominee: Estes Kefauver
Other candidates: John S. Battle
Happy Chandler
James C. Davis
W. Averell Harriman
Lyndon B. Johnson
Frank Lausche
George Bell Timmerman Jr.
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton
VP nominee: Symon Gould
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick 
VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Eric Hass
VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Party
Nominee: Darlington Hoopes
VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
T. Coleman Andrews
Gerald L. K. Smith
Other 1956 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1956)   1960 United States presidential election   (  1964)Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: John F. Kennedy
campaign
VP nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson
Other candidates
Ross Barnett
Pat Brown
Michael DiSalle
Paul C. Fisher
Hubert Humphrey
Lyndon B. Johnson
George H. McLain
Robert B. Meyner
Wayne Morse
Albert S. Porter
Adlai Stevenson II
George Smathers
Stuart Symington
Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Richard Nixon
VP nominee: Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Other candidates
Barry Goldwater
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
James M. Lloyd
Nelson Rockefeller
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee
Symon Gould
National States' Rights Party
Nominee
Orval Faubus
VP nominee
J. B. Stoner
Prohibition Party
Nominee
Rutherford Decker
VP nominee
E. Harold Munn
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee
Eric Hass
VP nominee
Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee
Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee
Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
Harry F. Byrd
Merritt B. Curtis
Lar Daly
George Lincoln Rockwell
Charles L. Sullivan
Other 1960 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1964) 1968 United States presidential election (1972  )Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Richard Nixon
campaign
VP nominee: Spiro Agnew
Other candidates: Frank Carlson
Clifford P. Case
Hiram Fong
John Lindsay
Ronald Reagan
Jim Rhodes
Nelson Rockefeller
Winthrop Rockefeller
George W. Romney
campaign
Harold Stassen
John A. Volpe
Democratic Party
Convention
protests
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Hubert Humphrey
campaign
VP nominee: Edmund Muskie
Other candidates: Roger D. Branigin
John G. Crommelin
Paul C. Fisher
Lyndon B. Johnson
incumbent
Robert F. Kennedy
campaign
Thomas C. Lynch
Eugene McCarthy
campaign
George McGovern
Dan K. Moore
Channing E. Phillips
George Smathers
Stephen M. Young
American Independent PartyCandidates
Nominee: George Wallace
campaign
VP nominee: Curtis LeMay
Other third party and independent candidatesCommunist Party
Nominee: Charlene Mitchell
VP nominee: Michael Zagarell
Peace and Freedom Party
Nominee: Eldridge Cleaver
VP nominee: Douglas Fitzgerald Dowd
Prohibition Party
Nominee: E. Harold Munn
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Henning A. Blomen
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Fred Halstead
VP nominee: Paul Boutelle
Independents and other candidates
Dick Gregory
Pat Paulsen
Pigasus
Other 1968 elections: House
Senate
Gubernatorial
vte(  1968)   1972 United States presidential election   (1976  )Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Incumbent nominee: Richard Nixon
Incumbent VP nominee: Spiro Agnew
Other candidates: John M. Ashbrook
Pete McCloskey
Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: George McGovern
campaign
VP nominee: Sargent Shriver
replacing Thomas Eagleton
Other candidates: Shirley Chisholm
Walter Fauntroy
Fred R. Harris
Vance Hartke
Wayne Hays
Hubert Humphrey
Henry M. Jackson
John Lindsay
Eugene McCarthy
Wilbur Mills
Patsy Mink
Edmund Muskie
Terry Sanford
George Wallace
Sam Yorty
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Independent Party
Nominee: John G. Schmitz 
VP nominee: Thomas J. Anderson
Communist Party
Nominee: Gus Hall
VP nominee: Jarvis Tyner
Libertarian Party
Nominee: John Hospers
VP nominee: Tonie Nathan
People's Party
Nominee: Benjamin Spock
VP nominee: Julius Hobson 
Prohibition Party
Nominee: E. Harold Munn
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Louis Fisher
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Linda Jenness
Alternate nominee: Evelyn Reed
VP nominee: Andrew Pulley
Independent
Candidates: Gabriel Green
Other 1972 elections: House
Senate
Gubernatorial
vteTime Persons of the Year1927 1950
Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)
1951 1975
Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II  (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segr  / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward  (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
 The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell  (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
 American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt  (1975)
1976 2000
Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wa sa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin  (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeff Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)
2001 present
Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins  (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
 The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates  (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
 Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah  (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)
 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital  (2018)
Greta Thunberg (2019)
Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020)
Elon Musk (2021)
Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022)
vteNational Football Foundation Gold Medal winners
1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower
1959: Douglas MacArthur
1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg
1961: John F. Kennedy
1962: Byron "Whizzer" White
1963: Roger Blough
1964: Donold B. Lourie
1965: Juan T. Trippe
1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik
1967: Frederick L. Hovde
1968: Chester J. LaRoche
1969: Richard Nixon
1970: Thomas J. Hamilton
1971: Ronald Reagan
1972: Gerald Ford
1973: John Wayne
1974: Gerald B. Zornow
1975: David Packard
1976: Edgar B. Speer
1977: Louis H. Wilson
1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy
1979: William P. Lawrence
1980: Walter J. Zable
1981: Justin W. Dart
1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown, Willie Davis,  Jack Kemp, Ron Kramer, Jim Swink
1983: Jack Kemp
1984: John F. McGillicuddy
1985: William I. Spencer
1986: William H. Morton
1987: Charles R. Meyer
1988: Clinton E. Frank
1989: Paul Brown
1990: Thomas H. Moorer
1991: George H. W. Bush
1992: Donald R. Keough
1993: Norman Schwarzkopf
1994: Thomas S. Murphy
1995: Harold Alfond
1996: Gene Corrigan
1997: Jackie Robinson
1998: John H. McConnell
1999: Keith Jackson
2000: Fred M. Kirby II
2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs
2002: George Steinbrenner
2003: Tommy Franks
2004: William V. Campbell
2005: Jon F. Hanson
2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden
2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach
2008: John Glenn
2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman
2010: Bill Cosby
2011: Robert Gates
2012: Roscoe Brown
2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell
2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss
2015: Condoleezza Rice
2016: Archie Manning
2017: None awarded
2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman
2019: Mark Harmon
vteCabinet of President Richard Nixon (1969 1974)CabinetVice President
Spiro Agnew (1969 1973)
None (1973)
Gerald Ford (1973 1974)
Secretary of State
William P. Rogers (1969 1973)
Henry Kissinger (1973 1974)
Secretary of the Treasury
David M. Kennedy (1969 1971)
John Connally (1971 1972)
George Shultz (1972 1974)
William E. Simon (1974)
Secretary of Defense
Melvin Laird (1969 1973)
Elliot Richardson (1973)
James R. Schlesinger (1973 1974)
Attorney General
John N. Mitchell (1969 1972)
Richard Kleindienst (1972 1973)
Elliot Richardson (1973)
William B. Saxbe (1974)
Postmaster General
Winton M. Blount (1969 1971)
Secretary of the Interior
Wally Hickel (1969 1970)
Rogers Morton (1971 1974)
Secretary of Agriculture
Clifford M. Hardin (1969 1971)
Earl Butz (1971 1974)
Secretary of Commerce
Maurice Stans (1969 1972)
Peter G. Peterson (1972 1973)
Frederick B. Dent (1973 1974)
Secretary of Labor
George Shultz (1969 1970)
James Day Hodgson (1970 1973)
Peter J. Brennan (1973 1974)
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
Robert Finch (1969 1970)
Elliot Richardson (1970 1973)
Caspar Weinberger (1973 1974)
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
George W. Romney (1969 1973)
James Thomas Lynn (1973 1974)
Secretary of Transportation
John A. Volpe (1969 1973)
Claude Brinegar (1973 1974)
Cabinet-levelDirector of the Bureau of the Budget
Robert Mayo (1969 1970)
Director of the Office of Management and Budget
George Shultz (1970 1972)
Caspar Weinberger (1972 1973)
Roy Ash (1973 1974)
Ambassador to the United Nations
Charles Yost (1969 1971)
George H. W. Bush (1971 1973)
John A. Scali (1973 1974)
Counselor to the President
Arthur F. Burns (1969)
Daniel Patrick Moynihan (1969 1970)
Bryce Harlow (1969 1970)
Robert Finch (1970 1972)
Donald Rumsfeld (1970 1971)
Anne Armstrong (1973 1974)
Dean Burch (1974)
Kenneth Rush (1974)
Portals: 1960s 1970s Biography California Conservatism Law Politics United States
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Academics
CiNii
2
Artists
Grammy Awards
MusicBrainz
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Nixon&oldid=1148906967"