Road surface disruption type
For other uses, see Pothole (disambiguation).
 Factors leading to pothole failure by fatigue in areas subject to freezing and thawing are: 1. Precipitation adds moisture to supporting soil structure. 2. Frost heaving can damage pavement. 3. Thawing can weaken soil structure. 4. Traffic can break the pavement.
A pothole is a depression in a road surface, usually asphalt pavement, where traffic has removed broken pieces of the pavement. It is usually the result of water in the underlying soil structure and traffic passing over the affected area. Water first weakens the underlying soil; traffic then fatigues and breaks the poorly supported asphalt surface in the affected area. Continued traffic action ejects both asphalt and the underlying soil material to create a hole in the pavement.[1]
Formation[edit]
 A deep pothole with a nearby patched area on New York City's Second Avenue
According to the US Army Corps of Engineers's Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, pothole formation requires two factors to be present at the same time: water and traffic. Water weakens the soil beneath the pavement while traffic applies the loads that stress the pavement past the breaking point. Potholes form progressively from fatigue of the road surface which can lead to a precursor failure pattern known as crocodile (or alligator) cracking.[2] Eventually, chunks of pavement between the fatigue cracks gradually work loose, and may then be plucked or forced out of the surface by continued wheel loads to create a pothole.[3]
In areas subject to freezing and thawing, frost heaving can damage a pavement and create openings for water to enter. In the spring, thaw of pavements accelerates this process when the thawing of upper portions of the soil structure in a pavement cannot drain past still-frozen lower layers, thus saturating the supporting soil and weakening it.[3]
Potholes can grow to several feet in width, though they usually only develop to depths of a few inches. If they become large enough, damage to tires, wheels, and vehicle suspensions is liable to occur. Serious road accidents can occur as a direct result, especially on those roads where vehicle speeds are greater.[3]
Potholes may result from four main causes:[3]
1. Insufficient pavement thickness to support traffic during freeze/thaw periods without localized failures
2. Insufficient drainage
3. Failures at utility trenches and castings (manhole and drain casings)
4. Pavement defects and cracks left unmaintained and unsealed so as to admit moisture and compromise the structural integrity of the pavement
Crocodile cracking showing moisture seepage, a sign of a weakened soil structure beneath the failed asphalt
Detail of pothole, showing presence of water in soil structure, on a road in Montr al, Qu bec
Example of a pothole reappearing on a newly patched roadway, also showing the transition between crocodile cracking and the pothole, with water dried up, in a road on the Isle of Wight
Small potholes, showing isolated failures of the pavement and its subsurface structure, in a road in Banbury, UK
Potholes on an unpaved road in Sweden
Prevention[edit]
The following steps can be taken to avoid pothole formation in existing pavements:[3]
1. Surveying of pavements for risk factors
2. Providing adequate drainage structures
3. Preventive maintenance
4. Utility cut management
5. Sealing Asphalt Cracks
Survey of pavements[edit]
At-risk pavement are more often local roads with lower structural standards and more complicating factors, like underground utilities, than major arteries. Pavement condition monitoring can lead to timely preventive action. Surveys address pavement distresses, which both diminishes the strength of the asphalt layer and admits water into the pavement, and effective drainage of water from within and around the pavement structure.[3]
Drainage[edit]
Drainage structures, including ditching and storm sewers are essential for removing water from pavements. Avoiding other risk factors with good construction includes well-draining base and sub-base soils that avoid frost action and promote drying of the soil structure. Adequate crowns promote drainage to the sides. Good crack control prevents water penetration into the pavement soil structure.[3]
Preventive maintenance[edit]
Preventive maintenance adds maintaining pavement structural integrity with thickness and continuity to the mix of preventing water penetration and promoting water migration away from the roadway.[3]
Utility cut management[edit]
Eaton, et al., advocate a permitting process for utility cuts with specifications that avoid loss of structural continuity of pavements and flaws or failures that allow water penetration.[3]
Sealing Asphalt Cracks[edit]
According to the US Federal Highway Administration, 70% of unsealed cracks become potholes within 3 years. Sealing the cracks through asphalt crack filling can help prevent potholes and further pavement damage.
Repair[edit]
Pothole patching methods may be either temporary or semi-permanent. Temporary patching is reserved for weather conditions that are not favorable to a more permanent solution and usually uses a cold mix asphalt patching compound placed in an expedient manner to temporarily restore pavement smoothness. Semi-permanent patching uses more care in reconstructing the perimeter of the failed area to blend with the surrounding pavement and usually employs a hot-mix asphalt fill above replacement of appropriate base materials.[3]
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) offers an overview of best practices which includes several repair techniques; throw-and-roll, semi-permanent, spray injection, and edge seal.[1] The FHWA suggests the best patching techniques, at times other than winter, are spray injection, throw-and-roll, semi-permanent, or edge seal procedures. In winter, the throw-and-roll technique may be the only available option. The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in South Africa offers similar methods for the repair of potholes.[4]
Materials[edit]
Asphaltic patch materials consist of a binder and aggregate that come in two broad categories, hot mix and cold mix. Hot mixes are used by some agencies, they are produced at local asphalt plants.[3] The FHWA manual cites three types of cold mixes, those produced by a local asphalt plant, either 1) using the available aggregate and binder or 2) according to specifications set by the agency that will use the mix. The third type is a proprietary cold mix, which is manufactured to an advertised standard.[1]
Throw-and-roll repair[edit]
The FHWA manual[1] cites the throw-and-roll method as the most basic method, best used as a temporary repair under conditions when it is difficult to control the placement of material, such as winter-time. It consists of:
Placing the hot or cold patch material into a pothole
Compacting the patch with a vehicle, such as a truck
Achieving a crown on the compacted patch of between 3 and 6 mm
This method is widely used due to its simplicity and speed, especially as an expedient method when the material is placed under unfavorable conditions of water or temperature. It can also be employed at times when the pothole is dry and clean with more lasting results.[5] Eaton, et al., noted that the failure rate of expedient repairs is high and that they can cost as much as five times the cost of properly done repairs. They advocate this type of repair only when weather conditions prevent proper techniques.[3]
Researchers from the University of Minnesota Duluth have tested mixing asphalt with iron ore containing magnetite which is then heated using ferromagnetic resonance (using microwaves at a specific frequency) to heat the mixed asphalt. The mixture used a compound of between 1% and 2% magnetite. The group discovered that material could be heated for a patch to 100 C (212 F) in approximately ten minutes which then applied a more effective repair and drove out moisture which improved adhesion.[6]
Throw-and-roll pothole repair procedure material placement
Throw-and-roll pothole repair procedure compaction of patch
Semi-permanent repair[edit]
The FHWA manual[1] cites the semi-permanent repair method as one of the best for repairing potholes, short of full-depth roadway replacement.  It consists of:
1. Removing water and debris from the pothole
2. Making clean cuts along the sides of prospective patch area to assure that vertical sides of the repair are in sound pavement (Eaton, et al.,[3] recommend a bituminous tack coat in the open cavity, prior to placement of patch material.)
3. Placing the hot or cold patch mix material
4. Compacting the patch with a device that is smaller than the patch area, e.g. vibratory rollers or a vibratory plate
While this repair procedure provides durable results, it requires more labor and is more equipment-intensive than the throw-and-roll or the spray-injection procedure.
Semi-permanent pothole repair procedure straightening edges using hand-held pavement saw
Semi-permanent pothole repair procedure compaction using vibratory-plate compactor
Semi-permanent pothole repair procedure small vibratory compactor for larger repairs
Spray-injection repair[edit]
The FHWA manual[1] cites the spray-injection procedure as an efficient alternative to semi-permanent repair. It requires specialized equipment, however.  It consists of:
1. Blowing water and debris from the pothole
2. Spraying a tack coat of binder on the sides and bottom of the pothole
3. Blowing asphalt and aggregate into the pothole
4. Covering the patched area with a layer of aggregate
This procedure requires no compaction after the cover aggregate has been placed.
Spray-injection device for pothole repair truck and trailer unit in the United States
Spray-injection device for pothole repair all-in-one repair unit in Montreal, which allows the operator to work from the comfort and safety of the cab
Spray-injection device for pothole repair all-in-one repair unit in the Czech Republic
Edge seal repair[edit]
The FHWA manual[1] cites the edge seal method as an alternative to the above techniques.  It consists of:
1. Following the "throw-and-roll" steps
2. After the repaired section has dried, placing a ribbon of asphaltic tack material on top of the patch edge, overlapping the pavement and the patch
3. Placing sand on the tack material to prevent tracking by vehicle tires
In this procedure, waiting for any water to dry may require a second visit to place the tack coat. The tack material prevents water from getting through the edge of the patch and helps bond the patch to the surrounding pavement.
Efficacy of repair methods[edit]
An FHWA-sponsored study determined that the "throw-and-roll technique proved as effective as the semi-permanent procedure when the two procedures were compared directly, using similar materials". It also found the throw-and-roll procedure to be generally more cost-effective when using quality materials. It further found that spray-injection repairs were as effective as control patches, depending on the expertise of the equipment operator.[5]
Costs to the public[edit]
The American Automobile Association estimated in the five years prior to 2016 that 16 million drivers in the United States have suffered damage from potholes to their vehicle including tire punctures, bent wheels, and damaged suspensions with a cost of $3 billion a year. In India, between 2015 and 2017, an average of 3,000 people per year were killed in accidents involving potholes.[7] Britain has estimated that the cost of fixing all roads with potholes in the country would cost  12 billion.[6]
Reporting[edit]
Some jurisdictions offer websites or mobile apps for pothole-reporting. These allow citizens to report potholes and other road hazards, optionally including a photograph and GPS coordinates.[8][9]  It is estimated there are 55 million potholes in the United States.[10]  The self-proclaimed pothole capital, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada reportedly spends $4.8 million on 450,000 potholes annually, as of 2015.[11]
India has historically lost over 3,000 people per year to accidents caused by potholes.[7] This situation has engendered citizen movement to address the problem.[12]
In the United Kingdom, more than half a million pot holes were reported in 2017, an increase of 44% on the 2015 figure. There are processes in place to report potholes at different levels of jurisdiction. The process for claiming compensation varies by jurisdiction.[13]
In popular culture[edit]
Potholes have been commented on both in various media.
Visual art[edit]
Two artists, Jim Bachor of Chicago and Baadal Nanjundaswamy of Bangalore, India, have used artwork as a commentary on potholes by placing mosaics (depicting ice cream in various manifestations)[14] or sculpture (in the form of a crocodile) in potholes.[15] Elsewhere, activists in Russia used painted caricatures of local officials with their mouths as potholes, to show their anger about the poor state of the roads.[16] In Manchester, England, a graffiti artist painted  images of penises around potholes, which often resulted in them being repaired within 48 hours.[17]
Song[edit]
The Beatles song "A Day in the Life" references potholes. John Lennon wrote the song's final verse inspired by a Far & Near news brief, in the same 17 January edition of the Daily Mail that had inspired the first two verses.[18] Under the headline "The holes in our roads", the brief stated: "There are 4,000 holes in the road in Blackburn, Lancashire, or one twenty-sixth of a hole per person, according to a council survey. If Blackburn is typical, there are two million holes in Britain's roads and 300,000 in London."[19]
Television[edit]
In the Seinfeld episode The Pothole, George discovers that he has lost his keys, including a commemorative Phil Rizzuto keychain that says "Holy Cow" when activated.  He then retraces his steps, and returns to a street where he had jumped over a pothole, which is now filled in with asphalt.  The "Holy Cow" phrase is heard when a car runs over it.
See also[edit]
Asphalt concrete
Road surface
References[edit]
^ a b c d e f g Wilson, T.P.; Romine, A.R. (June 1999). Materials and Procedures for Repair of Potholes in Asphalt-Surfaced Pavements Manual of Practice (PDF). Strategic Highway Research Program. Vol. FHWA-RD-99-168. Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration. p. 85.
^ Croll, James G. A. (January 2009). "The role of thermal ratcheting in pavement failures". Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers - Transport. Transport (3 ed.). Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers. 162 (3): 127 140. doi:10.1680/tran.2009.162.3.127.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m 
Eaton, Robert A.; Joubert, R. H.; Wright, E. A. (December 1989). Pothole primer A public administrator's guide to understanding and managing the pothole problem (PDF). Special Report. Vol. 81 21. US Army Corps of Engineers Cold Regions Research & Engineering Laboratory. p. 34.
^ Paige-Green, Phil. "Potholes Repair of Potholes" (PDF). Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2014.
^ a b 
Symons, Monte (November 1999). "Pothole Repair" (PDF). Tech Brief. Federal Highway Administration. Retrieved 18 February 2014.
^ a b "The hole story". The Economist. Retrieved 11 February 2017.
^ a b Sandhu, Kamaljit Kaur (24 July 2018). "Over 9300 deaths, 25000 injured in 3 years due to potholes". India Today. Retrieved 4 August 2019.
^ 
"Reporting potholes". Minnesota Department of Transportation. Retrieved 18 February 2014.
^ 
"Citizens Connect: Making Boston Beautiful". City of Boston. Retrieved 18 February 2014.
^ "Harper's Index". Harper's Magazine. June 1985. Retrieved 14 October 2014.
^ Hingston, Michael (April 2015). "Asphalt Nerds The alchemy of pavement in Canada's pothole capital". The Walrus. Retrieved 20 March 2015.
^ K.C., Deepika (1 March 2017). "Bengaluru has a superhero...he's 'Pothole Raja'". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 4 August 2019.
^ "How to make a claim for pothole damage to your car". The Swindonian. 30 December 2018. Retrieved 2 January 2019.
^ Fallon, Claire (25 May 2015). "Artist Jim Bachor Fixes Chicago Potholes With Ice Cream Mosaics". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 24 September 2015.
^ Bose, Adrija (19 June 2015). "How A Bengaluru Artist's 'Crocodile' In The Middle Of A Busy Road Got A Pothole Fixed". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 24 September 2015.
^ Schreck, Carl (19 June 2015). "Russian politicians mocked with guerrilla pothole portraits". New East Network. Retrieved 24 September 2015.
^ "Meet the man using penises to fill potholes". The Telegraph. 29 April 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2015.
^ Riley 2011, pp. 339 40. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRiley2011 (help)
^ "Far & Near: The holes in our roads". The Daily Mail. No. 21994. 17 January 1967. p. 7.
External links[edit]
Look up pothole in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Potholes.
Federal Highway Administration Manual of Practice for Pothole Repair
vteRoad hierarchyTypes of roadLimited-access
Bike freeway
Freeway / Motorway
Dual carriageway / Divided highway / Expressway
Elevated highway
By country
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
China (Hong Kong)
Croatia
Czech Republic
Germany
Greece
India
Ireland
Italy
Nepal
Pakistan
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Taiwan
United Kingdom
United States
Main roads
Arterial road
Collector road
County highway
Express-collector setup
Farm-to-market road
Highway
Link road
Two-lane expressway
2+1 road
2+2 road
Parkway
Ring road
Super two
Trunk road
Highway systems by country
Local roads
Alley
Avenue
Backroad
Bicycle boulevard
Boulevard
Country lane
Dead end
Driveway
Frontage road
Green lane
Main street
Primitive road
Road
Side road
Single carriageway
Single-track road
Street
Sunken lane
Other terms
Channelization
Concurrency
Detour
Hierarchy of roads
Private highway
Route number
special route
business route
Street hierarchy
Stroad
Toll road
Road junctionsInterchanges(grade-separated)
Cloverleaf
Diamond
Free-flow
Directional T
Diverging diamond
Parclo
Raindrop
Roundabout
Single-point urban (SPUI)
Stack
Three-level diamond
Trumpet
Intersections(at-grade)
3-way junction
Bowtie
Box junction
Continuous flow
Hook turn
Jughandle
Michigan left
Offset T-intersection
Protected intersection
Quadrant roadway
Right-in/right-out (RIRO)
Roundabout
Seagull intersection
Split intersection
Superstreet
Texas U-turn
Turnaround
Surfaces
Asphalt concrete
Bioasphalt
Brick
Chipseal
Cobblestone
Concrete
Reinforced concrete
Corduroy
Crocodile cracking
Crushed stone
Diamond grinding of pavement
Dirt
Full depth recycling
Glassphalt
Gravel
Ice
Macadam
Pavement milling
Permeable
Plank
Rubberized asphalt
Sealcoat
Sett
Stamped asphalt
Tarmac
Texture
Road safetyfactorsRoad andenvironment
Aquaplaning
Avalanche
Black ice
Bleeding
Crosswind
Dead Man's Curve
Expansion joint
Fog
Ford
Hairpin turn
Level crossing
Manhole cover
Oil spill
Oversize load
Pothole
Road debris
Road slipperiness
Road train
Roadkill
Rockfall
Rut
Speed bump
Storm drain
Washboarding
Washout
Whiteout
Snowsquall
Human factors
Driver's education
Driving under the influence
Road rage
Single-vehicle crash
Sleep-deprived driving
Vehicles
Automotive safety
Seat belts
Risk compensation (road transport)
Underride guard
Space andtime allocation
Barrier transfer machine
Bicycle lane
Climbing lane
Complete streets
Contraflow lane
Contraflow lane reversal
High-occupancy toll lane
High-occupancy vehicle lane
Lane
Living street
Managed lane
Median / Central reservation
Motorcycle lane
Passing lane
Pedestrian crossing
Pedestrian zone
Refuge island
Reversible lane
Road diet
Road verge
Runaway truck ramp
Shared space
Sidewalk / Pavement
Shoulder
Street running railway
Traffic calming
Traffic directionality
Traffic island
Traffic lanes
Traffic signal preemption
Truck bypass
Unused highway
Wide outside lane
Woonerf
Demarcation
Bollard
Botts' dots
Cable barrier
Cat's eye (road)
Concrete step barrier
Constant-slope barrier
Curb
F-Shape barrier
Guard rail
Jersey barrier
Kassel kerb
Noise barrier
Raised pavement marker
Road surface marking
Rumble strip
Traffic barrier
Traffic cone
Structures
Bridge
Causeway
Overpass / Flyover
Underpass / Tunnel
Performanceindicators
Pavement condition index
International roughness index
Present serviceability index
Pavement performance modeling
Granular base equivalency
Glossary of road transport terms
Road types by features
Authority control: National 
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pothole&oldid=1142164180"