Water that originates during precipitation events and snow/ice melt
 Urban runoff entering a storm drain
Public infrastructureGrand Coulee Dam
Assets and facilities
Airports
Bridges
Broadband
Canals
Coastal management
Critical infrastructure
Dams
Electricity
Energy
Hazardous waste
Hospitals
Irrigation schemes
Levees
Lighthouses
Parks
Pipeline transport
Ports
Mass transit
Public housing
State schools
Public spaces
Rail
Roads
Sewage treatment
Sewerage
Sluices
Solid waste
Telecommunication
Utilities
Water supply
Weirs
Concepts
Asset management
Appropriation
Lindahl tax
Build operate transfer
Design bid build
Design build
Earmark
Fixed cost
Engineering contracts
Externality
Government debt
Life-cycle assessment
Maintenance
Monopoly
Property tax
Public private partnership
Public capital
Public finance
Public good
Public sector
Renovation
Replacement (upgrade)
Spillover
Supply chain
Taxation
Issues and ideas
Air traffic control
Brownfield
Carbon footprint
Containerization
Congestion pricing
Ecotax
Ethanol fuel
Fuel tax
Groundwater
High-speed rail
Hybrid vehicles
Land-use planning
Mobile data terminal
Pork barrel
Rapid bus transit
Recycling
Renewables
Reverse osmosis
Smart grid
Smart growth
Stormwater
Urban sprawl
Traffic congestion
Transit-oriented development
Fuel efficiency
Waste-to-energy
Weatherization
Wireless technology
Fields of study
Architecture
Chemical engineering
Civil
Electrical
Mechanical engineering
Public economics
Public policy
Urban planning
Examples
 Akashi Kaiky  Bridge
 Trans-Alaska pipeline
 Autobahn
 Brazilian energy independence
 Brooklyn Bridge
 Channel Tunnel
 Chicago wastewater
 China's high-speed rail
 Curtiba rapid bus transit
 Danish wind-power
 British offshore wind-power
 Nuclear power in France
 Solar power in Germany
 Hoover Dam
 Hong Kong Int'l Airport
 Intercity Express
 Interstate highways
 Jamnagar Refinery
 Kansai Int'l Airport
 Panama Canal
 Port of Shanghai
 San Francisco Bay Bridge
 Three Gorges Dam
 Shinkansen
 Spanish high-speed rail
 French TGV rail
 Spanish autovias and autopistas
 Transcontinental Railroad
 Power transmission in the USA
 Category
 Engineering portalvte
Stormwater, also written storm water, is water that originates from precipitation (storm), including heavy rain and meltwater from hail and snow. Stormwater can soak into the soil (infiltrate) and become groundwater, be stored on depressed land surface in ponds and puddles, evaporate back into the atmosphere, or contribute to surface runoff.  Most runoff is conveyed directly as surface water to nearby streams, rivers or other large water bodies (wetlands, lakes and oceans) without treatment.
In natural landscapes, such as forests, soil absorbs much of the stormwater. Plants also reduce stormwater by improving infiltration, intercepting precipitation as it falls, and by taking up water through their roots. In developed environments, such as cities, unmanaged stormwater can create two major issues: one related to the volume and timing of runoff (flooding) and the other related to potential contaminants the water is carrying (water pollution). In addition to the pollutants carried in stormwater runoff, urban runoff is being recognized as a cause of pollution in its own right
Stormwater is also an important resource as human population and demand for water grow, particularly in arid and drought-prone climates. Stormwater harvesting techniques and purification could potentially make some urban environments self-sustaining in terms of water.
Impacts of stormwater[edit]
Stormwater pollution[edit]
Further information: Urban runoff
 Relationship between impervious surfaces and surface runoff
 Stormwater carrying street bound pollutants to a storm drain for coastal discharge.
With less vegetation and more impervious surfaces (parking lots, roads, buildings, compacted soil), developed areas allow less rain to infiltrate into the ground, and more runoff is generated than in undeveloped conditions. Additionally, passages such as ditches and storm sewers quickly transport runoff away from commercial and residential areas into nearby water bodies. This greatly increases the volume of water in waterways and the discharge of those waterways, leading to erosion and flooding. Because the water is flushed out of the watershed during the storm event, little infiltrates the soil, replenishes groundwater, or supplies stream baseflow in dry weather.[1]
A first flush is the initial runoff of a rainstorm. During this phase, polluted water entering storm drains in areas with high proportions of impervious surfaces is typically more concentrated compared to the remainder of the storm. Consequently, these high concentrations of urban runoff result in high levels of pollutants discharged from storm sewers to surface waters.[2][3]: 216 
Daily human activities result in deposition of pollutants on roads, lawns, roofs, farm fields, and other land surfaces. Such pollutants include trash, sediment, nutrients, bacteria, pesticides, metals, and petroleum byproducts.[4] When it rains or there is irrigation, water runs off and ultimately makes its way to a river, lake, or the ocean. While there is some attenuation of these pollutants before entering receiving waters, polluted runoff results in large enough quantities of pollutants to impair receiving waters.[5]
Stormwater runoff as a source of pollution[edit]
 Urban runoff being discharged to coastal waters
In addition to the pollutants carried in stormwater runoff, urban runoff is being recognized as a cause of pollution in its own right.
In natural catchments (watersheds) surface runoff entering waterways is a relatively rare event, occurring only a few times each year and generally after larger storms.  Before development occurred, most rainfall soaked into the ground and contributed to groundwater recharge or was recycled into the atmosphere by vegetation through evapotranspiration.
Modern drainage systems, which collect runoff from impervious surfaces (e.g., roofs and roads), ensure that water is efficiently moved to waterways through pipe networks, meaning that even small storms result in increased waterway flows.
In addition to delivering higher pollutants from the urban catchment, increased stormwater flow can lead to stream erosion, encourage weed invasion, and alter natural flow regimes. Native species often rely on such flow regimes for spawning, juvenile development, and migration.
Stormwater runoff from roadways has been observed to contain many metals including zinc (Zn), cadmium (Cd), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), lead (Pb), chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), iron (Fe), vanadium (V), cobalt (Co), and aluminum (Al) (Sansalone and Buchberger, 1997; Westerlund and Viklander, 2006)[full citation needed] and other constituents.
In some areas, especially along the U.S. coast, polluted runoff from roads and highways may be the largest source of water pollution. For example, about 75 percent of the toxic chemicals getting to Seattle, Washington's Puget Sound are carried by stormwater that runs off paved roads and driveways, rooftops, yards, and other developed land.[6]
Industrial stormwater is runoff from precipitation that lands on industrial sites (e.g. manufacturing facilities, mines, airports). This runoff is often polluted by materials that are handled or stored on the sites, and the facilities are subject to regulations to control the discharges.[7][8]
Urban flooding[edit]
Main article: Urban flooding
 Retention basin for management of stormwater
Stormwater is a major cause of urban flooding. Urban flooding is the inundation of land or property in a built-up environment caused by stormwater overwhelming the capacity of drainage systems, such as storm sewers. Although triggered by single events such as flash flooding or snow melt, urban flooding is a condition, characterized by its repetitive, costly and systemic impacts on communities. In areas susceptible to urban flooding, backwater valves and other infrastructure may be installed to mitigate losses.
Where properties are built with basements, urban flooding is the primary cause of basement and sewer backups. Although the number of casualties from urban flooding is usually limited, the economic, social and environmental consequences can be considerable: in addition to direct damage to property and infrastructure (highways, utilities and services), chronically wet houses are linked to an increase in respiratory problems and other illnesses.[9]  Sewer backups are often from the sanitary sewer system, which takes on some storm water as a result of Infiltration/Inflow.
 Volunteers clearing gutters in Ilorin, Nigeria during a volunteer sanitation day. Even when there is adequate infrastructure for sanitation, plastic pollution can interfere with storm water runoff creating space for mosquitos to breed in water, and causing flooding. Some sewage systems in the Global South are frequently overwhelmed by the waste, such as in Bangkok, Thailand.[10]
Stormwater creation of sinkhole collapses[edit]
An example of urban stormwater creating a sinkhole collapse is the February 25, 2002 Dishman Lane collapse in Bowling Green, Kentucky where a sinkhole suddenly dropped the road under four traveling vehicles. The nine-month repair of the Dishman Lane collapse cost a million dollars but there remains the potential for future problems.[11]
In undisturbed areas with natural subsurface (karst) drainage, soil and rock fragments choke karst openings thereby being a self-limitation to the growth of openings.[12]: 189 190, 196  The undisturbed karst drainage system becomes balanced with the climate so it can drain the water produced by most storms. However, problems occur when the landscape is altered by urban development.[13]: 28  In urban areas with natural subsurface (karst) drainage there are no surface streams for the increased stormwater from impervious surfaces such as roofs, parking lots, and streets to runoff into. Instead, the stormwater enters the subsurface drainage system by moving down through the ground. When the subsurface water flow becomes great enough to transport soil and rock fragments, the karst openings grow rapidly.[12]: 190  Where karst openings are roofed by supportive (competent) limestone, there frequently is no surface warning that an opening has grown so large it will suddenly collapse catastrophically.[12]: 198  Therefore, land use planning for new development needs to avoid karst areas.[13]: 37 38  Ultimately taxpayers end up paying the costs for poor land use decisions.
Stormwater management[edit]
 Stormwater filtration system for urban runoff
 Rain barrels can reduce runoff from building's downspouts and replace the use of potable water for activities such as gardening.
Managing the quantity and quality of stormwater is termed, "Stormwater Management."[14] The term Best Management Practice (BMP) or stormwater control measure (SCM) is often used to refer to both structural or engineered control devices and systems (e.g. retention ponds) to treat or store polluted stormwater, as well as operational or procedural practices (e.g. street sweeping).[15] Stormwater management includes both technical and institutional aspects.[16]
Technical aspects[edit]
This section is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (March 2023)
control of flooding and erosion;
control of hazardous materials to prevent release of pollutants into the environment (source control);
planning and construction of stormwater systems like retention basins, buried vaults with various kinds of media filters, and vortex separators to remove coarse solids[17] before they pollute surface waters or groundwater resources;
acquisition and protection of natural waterways or rehabilitation;
building nature-based solutions such as ponds, swales, constructed wetlands or green infrastructure solutions to work with existing or "hard" drainage structures, such as pipes and concrete channels (constructed wetlands built for stormwater treatment can also serve as habitat for plants, amphibians and fish)
Institutional and policy aspects[edit]
This section is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (March 2023)
development of funding approaches to stormwater programs potentially including stormwater user fees and the creation of a stormwater utility;
development of long-term asset management programs to repair and replace aging infrastructure;
revision of current stormwater regulations to address comprehensive stormwater needs;
enhancement and enforcement of existing ordinances to make sure property owners consider the effects of stormwater before, during and after development of their land;
education of a community about how its actions affect water quality, and about what it can do to improve water quality.
Integrated water management[edit]
 Rain garden designed to treat stormwater from adjacent parking lot.
Integrated water management (IWM) of stormwater has the potential to address many of the issues affecting the health of waterways and water supply challenges facing the modern urban city.  IWM is often associated with green infrastructure when considered in the design process.  Professionals in their respective fields, such as urban planners, architects, landscape architects, interior designers, and engineers, often consider integrated water management as a foundation of the design process.
Also known as low impact development (LID)[18] in the United States, or Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD)[19] in Australia, IWM has the potential to improve runoff quality, reduce the risk and impact of flooding and deliver an additional water resource to augment potable supply.
The development of the modern city often results in increased demands for water supply due to population growth, while at the same time altered runoff predicted by climate change has the potential to increase the volume of stormwater that can contribute to drainage and flooding problems.  IWM offers several techniques, including stormwater harvest (to reduce the amount of water that can cause flooding), infiltration (to restore the natural recharge of groundwater), biofiltration or bioretention (e.g., rain gardens), to store and treat runoff and release it at a controlled rate to reduce impact on streams and wetland treatments (to store and control runoff rates and provide habitat in urban areas).
There are many ways of achieving LID. The most popular is to incorporate land-based solutions to reduce stormwater runoff through the use of retention ponds, bioswales, infiltration trenches, sustainable pavements (such as permeable paving), and others noted above.  LID can also be achieved by utilizing engineered, manufactured products to achieve similar, or potentially better, results as land-based systems (underground storage tanks, stormwater treatment systems, biofilters, etc.).  The proper LID solution is one that balances the desired results (controlling runoff and pollution) with the associated costs (loss of usable land for land-based systems versus capital cost of manufactured solution). Green (vegetated) roofs are also another low-cost solution.
IWM as a movement can be regarded as being in its infancy and brings together elements of drainage science, ecology and a realization that traditional drainage solutions transfer problems further downstream to the detriment of the environment and water resources.
Regulations[edit]
United States[edit]
Main article: United States regulation of point source water pollution
Federal requirements[edit]
 Map of municipal separate storm sewer systems
In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is charged with regulating stormwater pursuant to the Clean Water Act (CWA).[20] The goal of the CWA is to restore all "Waters of the United States" to their "fishable" and "swimmable" conditions. Point source discharges, which originate mostly from municipal wastewater (sewage) and industrial wastewater discharges, have been regulated since enactment of the CWA in 1972. Pollutant loadings from these sources are tightly controlled through the issuance of National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits. However, despite these controls, thousands of water bodies in the U.S. remain classified as "impaired," meaning that they contain pollutants at levels higher than is considered safe by EPA for the intended beneficial uses of the water. Much of this impairment is due to polluted runoff, generally in urbanized watersheds (in other US watersheds, agricultural pollution is a major source).[21]: 15 
To address the nationwide problem of stormwater pollution, Congress broadened the CWA definition of "point source" in 1987 to include industrial stormwater discharges and Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems ("MS4"). These facilities are required to obtain NPDES permits.[22] In 2017, about 855 large municipal systems (serving populations of 100,000 or more), and 6,695 small systems are regulated by the permit system.[23]
State and local requirements[edit]
 A silt fence, a type of sediment control, installed on a construction site
EPA has authorized 47 states to issue NPDES permits.[24] In addition to implementing the NPDES requirements, many states and local governments have enacted their own stormwater management laws and ordinances, and some have published stormwater treatment design manuals.[14][25] Some of these state and local requirements have expanded coverage beyond the federal requirements. For example, the State of Maryland requires erosion and sediment controls on construction sites of 5,000 sq ft (460 m2) or more.[26] It is not uncommon for state agencies to revise their requirements and impose them upon counties and cities; daily fines ranging as high as $25,000 can be imposed for failure to modify their local stormwater permitting for construction sites, for instance.
Nonpoint source pollution management[edit]
Further information: Agricultural wastewater treatment and Erosion control
Agricultural runoff (except for concentrated animal feeding operations, or "CAFO") is classified as nonpoint source pollution under the CWA. It is not included in the CWA definition of "point source" and therefore not subject to NPDES permit requirements. The 1987 CWA amendments established a non-regulatory program at EPA for nonpoint source pollution management consisting of research and demonstration projects.[27] Related programs, such as the Environmental Quality Incentives Program are conducted by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) in the U.S. Department of Agriculture.[28]
 Public education graphic distributed by EPA
Public education campaigns[edit]
Education is a key component of stormwater management. A number of agencies and organizations have launched campaigns to teach the public about stormwater pollution, and how they can contribute to solving it. Thousands of local governments in the U.S. have developed education programs as required by their NPDES stormwater permits.[29]
One example of a local educational program is that of the West Michigan Environmental Action Council (WMEAC), which has coined the term Hydrofilth to describe stormwater pollution,[30] as part of its "15 to the River" campaign. (During a rain storm, it may take only 15 minutes for contaminated runoff in Grand Rapids, Michigan to reach the Grand River.)[31] Its outreach activities include a rain barrel distribution program and materials for homeowners on installing rain gardens.[32]
Other public education campaigns highlight the importance of green infrastructure in slowing down and treating stormwater runoff. DuPage County Stormwater Management launched the "Love Blue. Live Green." outreach campaign on social media sites to educate the public on green infrastructure and some other best management practices for stormwater runoff.[33] Articles, websites, pictures, videos and other media are spread to the public through this campaign.
History[edit]
Since humans began living in concentrated village or urban settings, stormwater runoff has been an issue.  During the Bronze Age, housing took a more concentrated form, and impervious surfaces emerged as a factor in the design of early human settlements. Some of the early incorporation of stormwater engineering is evidenced in Ancient Greece.[34]
A specific example of an early stormwater runoff system design is found in the archaeological recovery at Minoan Phaistos on Crete.[35]
See also[edit]
Water portal
Nationwide Urban Runoff Program (U.S. research program)
Sanitary sewer overflow
Stochastic Empirical Loading and Dilution Model
References[edit]
^ Schueler, Thomas R. "The Importance of Imperviousness." Archived 2014-03-27 at the Wayback Machine Reprinted in The Practice of Watershed Protection. 2000. Center for Watershed Protection, Ellicott City, MD.
^ Metcalf, Leonard; Eddy, Harrison P. (1916). American Sewerage Practice: Disposal of Sewage. Vol. III. New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 154.
^ Alex Maestre and Robert Pitt; Center for Watershed Protection (2005)."The National Stormwater Quality Database, Version 1.1: A Compilation and Analysis of NPDES Stormwater Monitoring Information." Report prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington, DC. September 4, 2005.
^ "Runoff: Surface and Overland Water Runoff". www.usgs.gov. Retrieved 2019-08-15.
^ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. "Results of the Nationwide Urban Runoff Program: Volume 1   Final Report", Water Planning Division. 1983.
^ Washington State Department of Ecology. "Control of Toxic Chemicals in Puget Sound, Phase 2: Development of Simple Numerical Models" Archived 2017-03-02 at the Wayback Machine, 2008
^ M ller, Alexandra;  sterlund, Hel ne; Marsalek, Jiri; Viklander, Maria (2020-03-20). "The pollution conveyed by urban runoff: A review of sources". Science of the Total Environment. Elsevier. 709. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.136125.
^ "Stormwater Discharges from Industrial Activities". EPA. 2022-11-28.
^ Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Scientific Findings Resource Bank (IAQ-SFRB), "Health Risks or Dampness or Mold in Houses" "Indoor Air Quality Scientific Findings Resource Bank : Indoor Dampness, Biological Contaminants and Health : Health Risk of Dampness or Mold in Houses". Archived from the original on 2013-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-17.
^ hermesauto (2016-09-06). "Plastic bags clogging Bangkok's sewers complicate efforts to fight floods". The Straits Times. Retrieved 2020-11-17.
^ Kambesis, P., R. Brucker, T. Waltham, F. Bell, and M. Culshaw. "Collapse sinkhole at Dishman Lane, Kentucky." Sinkholes and Subsidence: Karst and Cavernous Rocks in Engineering and Construction. Springer, Berlin (2005): 277-282.
^ a b c Palmer, Arthur N."Groundwater processes in karst terranes." Ground water geomorphology (1990): 177-209.
^ a b Veni, George. Living with Karst. American Geological Institute, 2001.
^ a b Washington State Department of Ecology (2005). Olympia, WA. "Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington." Archived 2012-04-02 at the Wayback Machine Publication No. 05-10-029.
^ National Research Council, Committee on Reducing Stormwater Discharge Contributions to Water Pollution (2009). "5. Stormwater Management Approaches". Urban Stormwater Management in the United States. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-12540-6.
^ Debo, Tom; Reese, Andrew (2003). "Chapter 2. Stormwater Management Programs". Municipal Stormwater Management. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. ISBN 1-56670-584-3.
^ Burton, G. Allen Jr.; Pitt, Robert E. (2001). "Chapter 2. Receiving Water Uses, Impairments, and Sources of Stormwater Pollutants". Stormwater Effects Handbook: A Toolbox for Watershed Managers, Scientists, and Engineers. New York: CRC/Lewis Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87371-924-7.
^ Prince George's County, Maryland. Department of Environmental Resources (January 2000). Low-Impact Development Design Strategies, An Integrated Design Approach (Report). EPA. EPA 841-B-00-003.
^ "Water Sensitive Urban Design - Melbourne Water". Wsud.melbournewater.com.au. Retrieved 2011-12-05.
^ United States. Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972 ("Clean Water Act"). Pub. L. 92 500, October 18, 1972.
^ National Water Quality Inventory: Report to Congress; 2004 Reporting Cycle (Report). EPA. January 2009. EPA 841-R-08-001.
^ United States. Water Quality Act of 1987, Pub. L. 100 4, February 4, 1987. Added CWA section 402(p), 33 U.S.C. 1342(p).
^ "Overview". NPDES / Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Sources. EPA. 2017-07-21.
^ "NPDES State Program Information". National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. EPA. 2018-08-20.
^ Maryland Stormwater Design Manual (Report). Baltimore, MD: Maryland Department of the Environment. 2009. Archived from the original on 2016-02-07.
^ State of Maryland. Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR). Activities for Which Approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plans are Required. Sec. 26.17.01.05.
^ Clean Water Act sec. 319, 33 U.S.C. 1329.
^ "Environmental Quality Incentives Program". Washington, D.C.: U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service. 2023-03-27.
^ "Developing an MS4 Program". NPDES/Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Sources. EPA. 2016.
^ West Michigan Environmental Action Council (WMEAC), Grand Rapids, MI. "Stop Hydrofilth." Accessed 2013-08-26.
^ WMEAC. "15 to the River" Accessed 2013-08-26.
^ WMEAC. "Rain Gardens... beautiful solutions for water pollution." Accessed 2013-08-26.
^ DuPage County Stormwater Management. "Education and Outreach." Accessed 2013-12-27.
^ Trimble, Stanley W. (2007). Encyclopedia of Water Science. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. ISBN 978-0-8493-9627-4.
^ C. Michael Hogan, "Phaistos Fieldnotes." The Modern Antiquarian (2007).
External links[edit]
Stormwater at Curlie
EPA Stormwater Permit Program
Stormwater Model USGS Stochastic Empirical Loading and Dilution Model (SELDM)
Stormwater Model USEPA Storm Water Management Model (SWMM)
International Stormwater Best Management Practices (BMP) Database
Stormwater YouTube Page
vteStormwater management structuresTreatment / Containment
Biofilter
Constructed wetland
Detention basin
Green roof
Media filter
Oil-grit separator
Retention basin
Stormwater detention vault
Stormwater harvesting
Flow control
Continuous monitoring and adaptive control
Flood control channel
Flow control structure
Hydrodynamic separator
Storm drain
Infiltration
Bioretention
Bioswale
Dry well
Infiltration basin
Percolation trench
Permeable paving
vteMarine pollution
Algal bloom
Anoxic event
Anoxic waters
Aquatic toxicology
Cultural eutrophication
Cyanotoxin
Dead zone
Environmental impact of shipping
Eutrophication
Fish diseases and parasites
Fish kill
Friendly Floatees
Garbage patch
Great Pacific
Indian Ocean
North Atlantic
South Pacific
GASB
Hypoxia
Invasive species
Marine debris
Mercury in fish
Microbead
Nonpoint source pollution
Nutrient pollution
Ocean acidification
Ocean deoxygenation
Oil spill
Particle
Plastic bags
Plastic pellet pollution
Point source pollution
Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
Silver nanoparticles
Stormwater
Surface runoff
Upwelling
Urban runoff
Water pollution
vteSewerageTypes
Combined sewer
Decentralized wastewater system
Drain-waste-vent system
Effluent sewer
Force main
Gravity sewer
Outfall
Pressure sewer
Sanitary sewer
Simplified sewerage
Storm drain
Vacuum sewer
Construction materials
Asbestos cement pipe
Brickwork
Cast iron pipe
Concrete pipe
Culvert
Interceptor ditch
Plastic pipe
Reinforced concrete
Steel pipe
Vitrified clay pipe
Related equipment
Chopper pumps
Combined sewer overflow
Grease trap
Grinder pump
Maceration
Manhole
Lift station
Sewage pumping
Sewer dosing unit
Sewer gas destructor lamp
Stormwater detention vault
Submersible pump
Sump pump
Trap
Problems
Biogenic sulfide corrosion
Blocked Sewer
Fatberg
First flush
Infiltration/Inflow
Sanitary sewer overflow
Sewer fly
Sewer gas
Sewer rat
Liquids transported
Blackwater (waste)
Greywater
Industrial wastewater
Sewage
Stormwater
Background
History of water supply and sanitation
vteRivers, streams and springsRivers(lists)
Alluvial river
Braided river
Blackwater river
Channel
Channel pattern
Channel types
Confluence
Distributary
Drainage basin
Subterranean river
River bifurcation
River ecosystem
River source
Tributary
Streams
Arroyo
Bourne
Burn
Chalk stream
Coulee
Current
Stream
Stream bed
Stream channel
Stream gradient
Stream pool
Perennial stream
Winterbourne
Springs(list)
Estavelle/Inversac
Geyser
Holy well
Hot spring
list
list in the US
Karst spring
list
Mineral spring
Ponor
Rhythmic spring
Spring horizon
Sedimentary processesand erosion
Abrasion
Anabranch
Aggradation
Armor
Bed load
Bed material load
Granular flow
Debris flow
Deposition
Dissolved load
Downcutting
Erosion
Headward erosion
Knickpoint
Palaeochannel
Progradation
Retrogradation
Saltation
Secondary flow
Sediment transport
Suspended load
Wash load
Water gap
Fluvial landforms
Ait
Alluvial fan
Antecedent drainage stream
Avulsion
Bank
Bar
Bayou
Billabong
Canyon
Chine
Cut bank
Estuary
Fluvial terrace
Gill
Gulch
Gully
Glen
Meander scar
Mouth bar
Oxbow lake
Riffle-pool sequence
Point bar
Ravine
Rill
River island
Rock-cut basin
Sedimentary basin
Sedimentary structures
Strath
Thalweg
River valley
Wadi
Fluvial flow
Helicoidal flow
International scale of river difficulty
Meander
Plunge pool
Rapids
Riffle
Shoal
Stream capture
Waterfall
Whitewater
Surface runoff
Agricultural wastewater
First flush
Urban runoff
Floods and stormwater
100-year flood
Crevasse splay
Flash flood
Flood
Urban flooding
Flood barrier
Flood control
Flood forecasting
Flood-meadow
Floodplain
Flood pulse concept
Flooded grasslands and savannas
Inundation
Storm Water Management Model
Return period
Point source pollution
Effluent
Industrial wastewater
Sewage
River measurementand modelling
Baer's law
Baseflow
Bradshaw model
Discharge (hydrology)
Drainage density
Exner equation
Groundwater model
Hack's law
Hjulstr m curve
Hydrograph
Hydrological modelling
Hydrological transport model
Infiltration (hydrology)
Main stem
Playfair's law
Relief ratio
River Continuum Concept
Rouse number
Runoff curve number
Runoff model (reservoir)
Stream gauge
Universal Soil Loss Equation
WAFLEX
Wetted perimeter
Volumetric flow rate
River engineering
Aqueduct
Balancing lake
Canal
Check dam
Dam
Drop structure
Daylighting
Detention basin
Erosion control
Fish ladder
Floodplain restoration
Flume
Infiltration basin
Leat
Levee
Retention basin
Revetment
Riparian-zone restoration
Stream restoration
Weir
River sports
Canyoning
Fly fishing
Rafting
River surfing
Riverboarding
Stone skipping
Triathlon
Whitewater canoeing
Whitewater kayaking
Whitewater slalom
Other topics
Aquifer
Aquatic toxicology
Body of water
Hydraulic civilization
Limnology
Riparian zone
River valley civilization
River cruise
Surface water
Wild river
Rivers by length
Rivers by discharge rate
Drainage basins
Whitewater rivers
Flash floods
River name etymologies
Countries without rivers
vteNatural resourcesAirPollution / quality
Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor
Law
Clean Air Act (USA)
Ozone depletion
Emissions
Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)
Energy
Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (gas, Peak coal, Peak gas, Peak oil)
Geothermal
Hydro
Nuclear
Solar
sunlight
shade
Wind
Land
Arable
peak farmland
Degradation
Landscape
cityscape
seascape
soundscape
viewshed
Law
property
Management
habitat conservation
Minerals
Gemstone
Industrial
Ore
Metal
mining
law
sand
peak
Copper
Phosphorus
rights
Soil
conservation
fertility
health
resilience
Use
planning
reserve
Life
Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries
climate change
law
management
Forests
genetic resources
law
management
non-timber products
Game
law
Marine conservation
Meadow
Plants
FAO Plant Treaty
food
genetic resources
gene banks
herbal medicines
UPOV Convention
wood
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife
conservation
management
WaterTypes / location
Aquifer
storage and recovery
Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater
pollution
recharge
remediation
Hydrosphere
Ice
bergs
glacial
polar
Irrigation
huerta
Marine
Rain
harvesting
Stormwater
Surface water
Sewage
Reclaimed water
Watershed
Aspects
Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources
management
policy
Related
Commons
enclosure
global
land
tragedy of
Economics
ecological
land
Ecosystem services
Exploitation
overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day
Management
adaptive
Natural capital
accounting
good
Natural heritage
Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness
Resource
Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable
 Category
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stormwater&oldid=1149242491"