Psychological concepts by Sigmund Freud
For other uses, see Ego (disambiguation) and ID (disambiguation).
This article may present fringe theories, without giving appropriate weight to the mainstream view, and explaining the responses to the fringe theories. Please help improve it or discuss the issue on the talk page. (May 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series of articles onPsychoanalysis
Concepts
Psychosexual development
Psychosocial development (Erikson)
Unconscious
Preconscious
Consciousness
Psychic apparatus
Id, ego and super-ego
Ego defenses
Projection
Introjection
Libido
Drive
Transference
Countertransference
Resistance
Denial
Dreamwork
Cathexis
Important figures
Karl Abraham
Alfred Adler
Michael Balint
Wilfred Bion
Josef Breuer
Nancy Chodorow
Max Eitingon
Erik Erikson
Ronald Fairbairn
Paul Federn
Otto Fenichel
S ndor Ferenczi
Anna Freud
Sigmund Freud
Erich Fromm
Harry Guntrip
Karen Horney
Edith Jacobson
Ernest Jones
Carl Jung
Abram Kardiner
Heinz Kohut
Melanie Klein
Julia Kristeva
Jacques Lacan
Ronald Laing
Jean Laplanche
Margaret Mahler
Jacques-Alain Miller
Sandor Rado
Otto Rank
Wilhelm Reich
Joan Riviere
Isidor Sadger
Ernst Simmel
Sabina Spielrein
Wilhelm Stekel
James Strachey
Harry Stack Sullivan
Susan Sutherland Isaacs
Donald Winnicott
Slavoj  i ek
Important works
The Interpretation of Dreams (1899)
The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901)
Three Essays on the Theoryof Sexuality (1905)
Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920)
The Ego and the Id (1923)
Schools of thought
Adlerian
Ego psychology
Jungian
Lacanian
Interpersonal
Intersubjective
Marxist
Object relations
Reichian
Relational
Self psychology
Training
Boston Graduate School ofPsychoanalysis
British Psychoanalytic Council
British Psychoanalytical Society
Columbia University Center forPsychoanalytic Training and Research
International Psychoanalytical Association
World Association of Psychoanalysis
List of schools of psychoanalysis
See also
Child psychoanalysis
Depth psychology
Psychodynamics
Psychoanalytic theory
 Psychology portalvte
The id, ego, and super-ego are a set of three concepts in psychoanalytic theory describing distinct, interacting agents in the psychic apparatus (defined in Sigmund Freud's structural model of the psyche). The three agents are theoretical constructs that describe the activities and interactions of the mental life of a person. In the ego psychology model of the psyche, the id is the set of uncoordinated instinctual desires; the super-ego plays the critical and moralizing role; and the ego is the organized, realistic agent that mediates between the instinctual desires of the id and the critical super-ego;[1] Freud explained that:
The functional importance of the ego is manifested in the fact that, normally, control over the approaches to motility devolves upon it. Thus, in its relation to the id, [the ego] is like a man on horseback, who has to hold in check the superior strength of the horse; with this difference, that the rider tries to do so with his own strength, while the ego uses borrowed forces. The analogy may be carried a little further. Often, a rider, if he is not to be parted from his horse, is obliged to guide [the horse] where it wants to go; so, in the same way, the ego is in the habit of transforming the id's will into action, as if it were its own.[2]
The existence of the super-ego is observable in how people can view themselves as guilty and bad, shameful and weak, and feel compelled to do certain things. In The Ego and the Id (1923), Freud presents "the general character of harshness and cruelty exhibited by the [ego] ideal   its dictatorial Thou shalt"; thus, in the psychology of the ego, Freud hypothesized different levels of ego ideal or superego development with greater ideals:
. . . nor must it be forgotten that a child has a different estimate of his parents at different periods of his life. At the time at which the Oedipus complex gives place to the super-ego they are something quite magnificent; but later, they lose much of this. Identifications then come about with these later parents as well, and indeed they regularly make important contributions to the formation of character; but in that case they only affect the ego, they no longer influence the super-ego, which has been determined by the earliest parental images. New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis, p. 64.
The earlier in the child's development, the greater the estimate of parental power; thus, when the child is in rivalry with the parental imago,[3] the child then feels the dictatorial Thou shalt, which is the manifest power that the imago represents on four levels: (i) the auto-erotic, (ii) the narcissistic, (iii) the anal, and (iv) the phallic.[4] Those different levels of mental development, and their relations to parental imagos, correspond to specific id forms of aggression and affection;[5] thus aggressive and destructive desires animate the myths in the fantasies and repressions of patients, in all cultures. In response to the unstructured ambiguity and conflicting uses of the term "the unconscious mind", Freud introduced the structured model of ego psychology (id, ego, super-ego) in the essay Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) and elaborated, refined, and made that model formal in the essay The Ego and the Id.[6]
Psychic apparatus[edit]
Id[edit]
The id is the instinctual component of personality that is present at birth,[7] and is the source of bodily needs and wants, emotional impulses and desires, especially aggression and the libido (sex drive).[8] The id acts according to the pleasure principle   the psychic force oriented to immediate gratification of impulse and desire   defined by the avoidance of pain.[9][10] Freud said that the Id is unconscious, by definition:
It is the dark, inaccessible part of our personality, what little we know of it we have learned from our study of the dreamwork, and, of course, the construction of neurotic symptoms and most of that is of a negative character, and can be described only as a contrast to the ego. We approach the id with analogies: we call it a chaos, a cauldron full of seething excitations. . . . It is filled with energy reaching it from the instincts, but it has no organization, produces no collective will, but only a striving to bring about the satisfaction of the instinctual needs subject to the observance of the pleasure principle.[11]
In the id:
contrary impulses exist side by side, without cancelling each other. . . . There is nothing in the id that could be compared with negation . . . nothing in the id which corresponds to the idea of time.[12]
Developmentally, the id precedes the ego; the psychic apparatus begins, at birth, as an undifferentiated id, part of which then develops into a structured ego. While "id" is in search of pleasure, "ego" emphasizes the principle of reality.[13] Thus the id:
contains everything that is inherited, that is present at birth, is laid down in the constitution   above all, therefore, the instincts, which originate from the somatic organization, and which find a first psychical expression here (in the id) in forms unknown to us.[14]
The mind of a newborn child is regarded as completely "id-ridden", in the sense that it is a mass of instinctive drives and impulses, and needs immediate satisfaction. The "id" moves on to what the organism needs. Example is reduction of tension which is experienced.[2]
The id "knows no judgements of value: no good and evil, no morality. ...Instinctual cathexes seeking discharge that, in our view, is all there is in the id."[15] It is regarded as "the great reservoir of libido",[16] the instinctive drive to create the life instincts that are crucial to pleasurable survival. Alongside the life instincts came the death instincts the death drive which Freud articulated relatively late in his career in "the hypothesis of a death instinct, the task of which is to lead organic life back into the inanimate state."[17] For Freud, "the death instinct would thus seem to express itself though probably only in part as an instinct of destruction directed against the external world and other organisms"[18] through aggression. Freud considered that "the id, the whole person...originally includes all the instinctual impulses...the destructive instinct as well",[19] as eros or the life instincts.
Ego[edit]
The ego (Latin for "I",[20] German: Ich)[21] acts according to the reality principle; i.e., it seeks to please the id's drive in realistic ways that, in the long term, bring benefit, rather than grief.[22] At the same time, Freud concedes that as the ego "attempts to mediate between id and reality, it is often obliged to cloak the (unconscious) commands of the id with its own  preconscious rationalizations, to conceal the id's conflicts with reality, to profess...to be taking notice of reality even when the id has remained rigid and unyielding."[23] The reality principle that operates the ego is a regulating mechanism that enables the individual to delay gratifying immediate needs and function effectively in the real world. An example would be to resist the urge to grab other people's belongings, but instead to purchase those items.[24]
The ego is the organized part of the personality structure that includes defensive, perceptual, intellectual-cognitive, and executive functions. Conscious awareness resides in the ego, although not all of the operations of the ego are conscious. Originally, Freud used the word ego to mean a sense of self, but later revised it to mean a set of psychic functions such as judgment, tolerance, reality testing, control, planning, defense, synthesis of information, intellectual functioning, and memory.[25] The ego separates out what is real. It helps us to organize our thoughts and make sense of them and the world around us.[25] "The ego is that part of the id which has been modified by the direct influence of the external world. ...The ego represents what may be called reason and common sense, in contrast to the id, which contains the passions...in its relation to the id it is like a tug of war, which the ego has to hold in check the id to not let it loose; with the difference, that the teams fought against one other in equality, while the ego was against the much stronger 'id'."[26] Still worse, "it serves three severe masters...the external world, the super-ego and the id."[23] Its task is to find a balance between primitive drives and reality while satisfying the id and super-ego. Its main concern is with the individual's safety and allows some of the id's desires to be expressed, but only when consequences of these actions are marginal. "Thus the ego, driven by the id, confined by the super-ego, repulsed by reality, struggles...[in] bringing about harmony among the forces and influences working in and upon it," and readily "breaks out in anxiety realistic anxiety regarding the external world, moral anxiety regarding the super-ego, and neurotic anxiety regarding the strength of the passions in the id."[27] It has to do its best to suit all three, thus is constantly feeling hemmed by the danger of causing discontent on two other sides. It is said, however, that the ego seems to be more loyal to the id, preferring to gloss over the finer details of reality to minimize conflicts while pretending to have a regard for reality. But the super-ego is constantly watching every one of the ego's moves and punishes it with feelings of guilt, anxiety, and inferiority.
To overcome this the ego employs defense mechanisms. The defense mechanisms are not done so directly or consciously. They lessen the tension by covering up our impulses that are threatening.[28] Ego defense mechanisms are often used by the ego when id behavior conflicts with reality and either society's morals, norms, and taboos or the individual's expectations as a result of the internalization of these morals, norms, and their taboos.
Denial, displacement, intellectualisation, fantasy, compensation, projection, rationalization, reaction formation, regression, repression, and sublimation were the defense mechanisms Freud identified. However, his daughter Anna Freud clarified and identified the concepts of undoing, suppression, dissociation, idealization, identification, introjection, inversion, somatisation, splitting, and substitution.
 "The ego is not sharply separated from the id; its lower portion merges into it.... But the repressed merges into the id as well, and is merely a part of it. The repressed is only cut off sharply from the ego by the resistances of repression; it can communicate with the ego through the id." (Sigmund Freud, 1923)In a diagram of the Structural and Topographical Models of Mind, the ego is depicted to be half in the consciousness, while a quarter is in the preconscious and the other quarter lies in the unconscious.
In modern English, ego has many meanings. It could mean one's self-esteem; an inflated sense of self-worth; the conscious-thinking self;[29] or in philosophical terms, one's self. Ego development is known as the development of multiple processes, cognitive function, defenses, and interpersonal skills or to early adolescence when ego processes are emerged.[22]
Super-ego[edit]
The super-ego[30] (German:  ber-Ich)[31] reflects the internalization of cultural rules, mainly taught by parents applying their guidance and influence.[9] Freud developed his concept of the super-ego from an earlier combination of the ego ideal and the "special psychical agency which performs the task of seeing that narcissistic satisfaction from the ego ideal is ensured...what we call our 'conscience'."[32] For him "the installation of the super-ego can be described as a successful instance of identification with the parental agency," while as development proceeds "the super-ego also takes on the influence of those who have stepped into the place of parents  educators, teachers, people chosen as ideal models".
Thus a child's super-ego is in fact constructed on the model not of its parents but of its parents' super-ego; the contents which fill it are the same and it becomes the vehicle of tradition and of all the time-resisting judgments of value which have propagated themselves in this manner from generation to generation.[33]
The super-ego aims for perfection.[28] It forms the organized part of the personality structure, mainly but not entirely unconscious, that includes the individual's ego ideals, spiritual goals, and the psychic agency (commonly called "conscience") that criticizes and prohibits their drives, fantasies, feelings, and actions. "The Super-ego can be thought of as a type of conscience that punishes misbehavior with feelings of guilt. For example, for having extra-marital affairs."[34] Taken in this sense, the super-ego is the precedent for the conceptualization of the inner critic as it appears in contemporary therapies such as IFS.[35]
The super-ego works in contradiction to the id. The super-ego strives to act in a socially appropriate manner, whereas the id wants instant self-gratification. The super-ego controls our sense of right and wrong and guilt.[36] It helps us fit into society by getting us to act in socially acceptable ways.[25]
The super-ego's demands often oppose the id's, so the ego sometimes has a hard time in reconciling the two.[28]
Freud's theory implies that the super-ego is a symbolic internalisation of the father figure and cultural regulations. The super-ego tends to stand in opposition to the desires of the id because of their conflicting objectives, and its aggressiveness towards the ego. The super-ego acts as the conscience, maintaining our sense of morality and proscription from taboos. The super-ego and the ego are the product of two key factors: the state of helplessness of the child and the Oedipus complex.[37] Its formation takes place during the dissolution of the Oedipus complex and is formed by an identification with and internalisation of the father figure after the little boy cannot successfully hold the mother as a love-object out of fear of castration. Freud described the super-ego and its relationship to the father figure and Oedipus complex thus:
The super-ego retains the character of the father, while the more powerful the Oedipus complex was and the more rapidly it succumbed to repression (under the influence of authority, religious teaching, schooling and reading), the stricter will be the domination of the super-ego over the ego later on in the form of conscience or perhaps of an unconscious sense of guilt.[38]
The concept of super-ego and the Oedipus complex is subject to criticism for its perceived sexism. Women, who are considered to be already castrated, do not identify with the father, and therefore, for Freud, "their super-ego is never so inexorable, so impersonal, so independent of its emotional origins as we require it to be in men...they are often more influenced in their judgements by feelings of affection or hostility."[39] However, Freud went on to modify his position to the effect "that the majority of men are also far behind the masculine ideal and that all human individuals, as a result of their human identity, combine in themselves both masculine and feminine characteristics, otherwise known as human characteristics."[40]
Advantages of the structural model[edit]
 The iceberg metaphor is often used to explain the psyche's parts in relation to one another.
Freud's earlier, topographical model of the mind had divided the mind into the three elements of conscious, preconscious, and unconscious. The conscious contains events that we are aware of, preconscious is events that are in the process of becoming conscious, and unconscious include events that we are not aware of.[41] At its heart was "the dialectic of unconscious traumatic memory versus consciousness...which soon became a conflict between System Ucs versus System Cs."[42] With what Freud called the "disagreeable discovery that on the one hand (super-)ego and conscious and on the other hand repressed and unconscious are far from coinciding,"[43] Freud took the step in the structural model to "no longer use the term 'unconscious' in the systematic sense," and to rename "the mental region that is foreign to the ego...[and] in future call it the 'id'."[44] The partition of the psyche defined in the structural model is thus one that cuts across the topographical model's partition of "conscious vs. unconscious".
"The new terminology which he introduced has a highly clarifying effect and so made further clinical advances possible."[45] Its value lies in the increased degree of precision and diversification made possible: Although the id is unconscious by definition, the ego and the super-ego are both partly conscious and partly unconscious. What is more, with this new model Freud achieved a more systematic classification of mental disorder than had been available previously:
Transference neuroses correspond to a conflict between the ego and the id; narcissistic neuroses, to a conflict between the ego and the superego; and psychoses, to one between the ego and the external world.[46]
It is important to realise however, that "the three newly presented entities, the id, the ego and the superego, all had lengthy past histories (two of them under other names)"[47] the id as the systematic unconscious, the super-ego as conscience/ego ideal. Equally, Freud never abandoned the topographical division of conscious, preconscious, and unconscious, though as he noted ruefully "the three qualities of consciousness and the three provinces of the mental apparatus do not fall together into three peaceful couples...we had no right to expect any such smooth arrangement."[48]
The iceberg metaphor is a commonly used visual metaphor when attempting to relate the ego, id and superego with the conscious and unconscious mind. In the iceberg metaphor the entire id and part of both the superego and the ego would be submerged in the underwater portion representing the unconscious mind. The remaining portions of the ego and superego would be displayed above water in the conscious mind area.[8]
Translation[edit]
The terms "id", "ego", and "super-ego" are not Freud's own. They are latinisations by his translator James Strachey. Freud himself wrote of "das Es",[49] "das Ich",[21] and "das  ber-Ich"[31] respectively, "the It", "the I", and "the Over-I" (or "I above"); thus to the German reader, Freud's original terms are more or less self-explanatory. Freud borrowed the term "das Es" from Georg Groddeck, a German physician to whose unconventional ideas Freud was much attracted (Groddeck's translators render the term in English as "the It").[50] The word ego is taken directly from Latin, where it is the nominative of the first person singular personal pronoun and is translated as "I myself" to express emphasis.
Figures like Bruno Bettelheim have criticized the way "the English translations impeded students' efforts to gain a true understanding of Freud"[51] by substituting the formalised language of the elaborated code for the quotidian immediacy of Freud's own language.
See also[edit]
Ahamkara  Sanskrit term in Sa khy  philosophy
Alter ego  Alternative self or personality distinct from the actual identity
Censorship (psychoanalysis)  Barrier of the conscious and unconscious
Collective unconscious  Term of analytical psychology
Ego death  Complete loss of subjective self-identity
Eight-circuit model of consciousness  Hypothesis by Timothy Leary
Existentialism  Philosophical form of enquiry into subjective existence
Higher self  Term associated with multiple belief systems
Ho oponopono  Ancient Hawaiian practice of reconciliation and forgiveness
Logic  Study of correct reasoning
Nafs  Quranic Arabic word for the "self"
Personhood  Status of being a person
Plato's theory of soul  Plato's account of the soul as consisting of logical, spirited, and appetitive parts
Psychology of self  Study of the representation of one's identity
Reason  Capacity for consciously making sense of things
Reductionism  Philosophical view explaining systems in terms of smaller parts
Research Domain Criteria  Diagnostic framework in personalized psychiatry
Resistance (psychoanalysis)  Term used in psychoanalysis describing oppositional behaviors
Shoulder angel  Plot device used for an effect in fictional works
Transactional analysis  Theory and practice of a type of psychological analysis
Triune brain  Model of evolutionary neurology proposed by Paul McLean
References[edit]
^ Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. Vol. XIX (1999) James Strachey, Gen. Ed. ISBN 0-09-929622-5
^ a b Freud, Sigmund (1978). The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. Volume XIX (1923 26) The Ego and the Id and Other Works. Strachey, James., Freud, Anna, 1895 1982, Rothgeb, Carrie Lee, Richards, Angela., Scientific Literature Corporation. London: Hogarth Press. p. 19. ISBN 0701200677. OCLC 965512.
^ "APA Dictionary of Psychology".
^ Pederson, Trevor (2015). The Economics of Libido: Psychic Bisexuality, the Superego, and the Centrality of the Oedipus Complex. Karnac.
^ Hommel, Bernhard (2019-10-01). "Affect and control: A conceptual clarification". International Journal of Psychophysiology. 144: 1 6. doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2019.07.006. ISSN 0167-8760. PMID 31362029. S2CID 198998249.
^ The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought, Third Edition (1999) Allan Bullock and Stephen Trombley, Eds. pp. 256 257.
^ Cherry, Kendra (6 November 2018). "Freud and the Id, Ego, and Superego". VeryWellMind.com. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
^ a b Carlson, N. R. (1999 2000)  Personality , Psychology: The Science of Behavior (Canadian ed.), p. 453. Scarborough, Ontario: Allyn and Bacon Canada.
^ a b Schacter, Daniel (2009). Psychology Second Edition. New York City: Worth Publishers. p. 481. ISBN 978-1-4292-3719-2.
^ Rycroft, Charles (1968). A Critical Dictionary of Psychoanalysis. Basic Books.
^ Sigmund Freud (1933), New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis. pp. 105 6.
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). p. 106.
^ Lapsley, Daniel K.; Paul C., Stey (2012). "Id, Ego, and Superego" (PDF). Encyclopedia of Human Behavior. pp. 393 399. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-375000-6.00199-3. ISBN 9780080961804. Chapter of Ramachandran, Vilayanur S., ed. (2012). Encyclopedia of Human Behavior (2nd, revised ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Academic Press. pp. 393-399. ISBN 978-0-080-96180-4.
^ Freud, An Outline of Psycho-analysis (1940)
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). p. 107.
^ Sigmund Freud, The Ego and the Id, On Metapsychology (Penguin Freud Library 11) p. 369.
^ Freud, On Metapsychology p. 380.
^ Freud, On Metapsychology p. 381.
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). p. 138.
^ "Ego". Encyclop dia Britannica. February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2017.
^ a b Laplanche, Jean; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (2018) [1973]. "Ego".
^ a b Noam, Gil G; Hauser, Stuart taque chinaz #14 T.; Santostefano, Sebastiano; Garrison, William; Jacobson, Alan M.; Powers, Sally I.; Mead, Merrill (February 1984). "Ego Development and Psychopathology: A Study of Hospitalized Adolescents". Child Development. Blackwell Publishing on behalf of the Society for Research in Child Development. 55 (1): 189 194. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1984.tb00283.x. PMID 6705621.
^ a b Sigmund Freud (1933). p. 110
^ Schacter, Gilbert, Wegner, Daniel (2011). Psychology (1. publ., 3. print. ed.). Cambridge: WorthPublishers. ISBN 978-1-429-24107-6.
^ a b c Snowden, Ruth (2006). Teach Yourself Freud. McGraw-Hill. pp. 105 107. ISBN 978-0-07-147274-6.
^ Freud,The Ego and the Id, On Metapsychology pp. 363 4.
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). pp. 110 11.
^ a b c Meyers, David G. (2007). "Module 44 The Psychoanalytic Perspective". Psychology Eighth Edition in Modules. Worth Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7167-7927-8.
^ http://www.worldtransformation.com/ego/ "Ego". In The Book of Real Answers to Everything!, Griffith J. 2011. ISBN 9781741290073.
^ "Superego". Encyclop dia Britannica. February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2017.
^ a b Laplanche, Jean; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (2018) [1973]. "Super-Ego".
^ Freud, On Metapsychology pp. 89-90.
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). pp. 95-6.
^ Arthur S. Reber, The Penguin Dictionary of Psychology (1985)
^ Schwartz, Richard (1997). Internal Family Systems Therapy. The Guilford Press.
^ Calian, Florian (2012). Plato's Psychology of Action and the Origin of Agency. L'Harmattan. pp. 17 19. ISBN 978-963-236-587-9.
^ S dat, Jacques (2000). "Freud". Collection Synth se. Armand Colin. 109. ISBN 978-2-200-21997-0.
^ Freud, The Ego and the Id.
^ Sigmund Freud, On Sexuality (Penguin Freud Library 7) p. 342.
^ Freud, On Sexuality p. 342.
^ Carlson, Neil R. (2010). Psychology, the science of behaviour: The psychodynamic approach. Toronto: Pearson Canada. p. 453. ISBN 978-0-205-64524-4.
^ James S. Grotstein, in Neville Symington, Narcissism: A New Theory (London 2003) p. x
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). p. 101.
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). p. 104.
^ Angela Richards "Editor's Introduction" Freud, On Metapsychology pp. 344 5.
^ Freud, Neurosis and Psychosis
^ Angela Richards, "Editor's Introduction" in On Metapsychology p. 345.
^ Sigmund Freud (1933). pp. 104 5.
^ Laplanche, Jean; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (2018) [1973]. "Id". The Language of Psychoanalysis. Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-92124-7.
^ Original German: Groddeck, Georg (1923). Das Buch vom Es. Psychoanalytische Briefe an eine Freundin (in German). Vienna: Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag.English translation:   (1928). The Book of the It: Psychoanalytic Letters to a Friend. New York / Washington: Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Company.
^ Quoted in Neville Symington, Narcissism: A New Theory (London 1996) p. 10.
Further reading[edit]
Freud, Sigmund (April 1910). "The Origin and Development of Psychoanalysis". American Journal of Psychology. 21 (2): 181 218. doi:10.2307/1413001. JSTOR 1413001.
Freud, Sigmund (1920), Beyond the Pleasure Principle.
Freud, Sigmund (1923), Das Ich und das Es, Internationaler Psycho-analytischer Verlag, Leipzig, Vienna, and Zurich. English translation, The Ego and the Id, Joan Riviere (trans.), Hogarth Press and Institute of Psycho-analysis, London, UK, 1927. Revised for The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, James Strachey (ed.), W.W. Norton and Company, New York City, NY, 1961.
Freud, Sigmund (1923), "Neurosis and Psychosis". The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume XIX (1923 1925): The Ego and the Id and Other Works, 147 154
Gay, Peter (ed., 1989), The Freud Reader. W.W. Norton.
Rangjung Dorje (root text): Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche (commentary), Peter Roberts (translator) (2001) Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom, (Wylie: rnam shes ye shes  byed pa)
Kurt R. Eissler: The effect of the structure of the ego on psychoanalytic technique (1953) / republished by Psychomedia
External links[edit]
American Psychological Association
Sigmund Freud and the Freud Archives
Section 5: Freud's Structural and Topographical Model, Chapter 3: Personality Development Psychology 101.
An introduction to psychology: Measuring the unmeasurable
Splash26, Lacanian Ink
Sigmund Freud
Sigmund Freud's theory (Russian)
Education portal's lesson on the id, ego, and superego
Information on Charcot, Freud's teacher and mentor
Background information on Freud
vteSigmund FreudBooks
On Aphasia (1891)
Studies on Hysteria (1895)
The Interpretation of Dreams (including On Dreams) (1899)
The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901)
Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (1905)
Totem and Taboo (1913)
The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1914)
Introduction to Psychoanalysis (1916-17)
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921)
The Ego and the Id (1923)
The Question of Lay Analysis (1926)
The Future of an Illusion (1927)
Civilization and Its Discontents (1930)
Moses and Monotheism (1939)
Essays
"The Aetiology of Hysteria" (1896)
Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905)
Delusion and Dream in Jensen's Gradiva (1907)
Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming (1908)
Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood (1910)
On Narcissism (1914)
Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work (1915)
Thoughts for the Times on War and Death (1916)
Mourning and Melancholia (1918)
Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920)
Medusa's Head (1922)
Dostoevsky and Parricide (1928)
Case studies
"Dora" (Ida Bauer)
Emma Eckstein
Herbert Graf ("Little Hans")
Irma's injection
"Anna O." (Bertha Pappenheim)
"Rat Man"
Sergei Pankejeff ("Wolfman")
Daniel Paul Schreber
Originalconcepts
Psychoanalysis
Id, ego, and super-ego
Libido
Preconscious
Ego ideal
censorship
Free association
Transference
Psychosexual development
Oral stage
Anal stage
Phallic stage
Latency stage
Genital stage
Oedipus complex
Father complex
Deferred obedience
Reality principle
Seduction theory
Related
Bibliography
Archives
Vienna home and museum
London home and museum
1971 statue
Interment
Freudian slip
Humor
Inner circle
Neo-Freudianism
Views on homosexuality
Religious views
Culturaldepictions
Freud: The Secret Passion (1962 film)
The Visitor (1993 play)
Mahler on the Couch (2010 film)
A Dangerous Method (2011 film)
Freud (2020 TV series)
Family
Martha Bernays (wife)
Anna Freud (daughter)
Ernst L. Freud (son)
Clement Freud (grandson)
Lucian Freud (grandson)
Walter Freud (grandson)
Amalia Freud (mother)
Jacob Freud (father)
Edward Bernays (nephew)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Id,_ego_and_super-ego&oldid=1147060678"