Visible part of the ear that is outside the head
This article is about mammalian anatomy. It is not to be confused with pinnae of leaves.
AuricleThe auricula. Lateral surface.DetailsArteryposterior auricular, anterior auricularNerveTrigeminal nerve, great auricular nerve, lesser occipital nerveLymphTo pre- and post-auricular nodes, nodes of parotid and cervical chainsIdentifiersLatinauriculaMeSHD054644TA98A15.3.01.002TA2104, 6863FMA56580Anatomical terminology[edit on Wikidata]
The auricle or auricula is the visible part of the ear that is outside the head.  It is also called the pinna (Latin for "wing" or "fin", plural pinnae), a term that is used more in zoology.
Structure[edit]
The diagram shows the shape and location of most of these components:
antihelix forms a 'Y' shape where the upper parts are:
Superior crus (to the left of the fossa triangularis in the diagram)
Inferior crus (to the right of the fossa triangularis in the diagram)
Antitragus is below the tragus
Aperture is the entrance to the ear canal
Auricular sulcus is the depression behind the ear next to the head
Concha is the hollow next to the ear canal
Conchal angle is the angle that the back of the concha makes with the side of the head
Crus of the helix is just above the tragus
Cymba conchae is the narrowest end of the concha
External auditory meatus is the ear canal
Fossa triangularis is the depression in the fork of the antihelix
Helix is the folded over outside edge of the ear
Incisura anterior auris, or intertragic incisure, or intertragal notch, is the space between the tragus and antitragus
Lobe (lobule)
Scapha, the depression or groove between the helix and the anthelix
Tragus
Development[edit]
The developing auricle is first noticeable around the sixth week of gestation in the human fetus, developing from the auricular hillocks, which are derived from the first and second pharyngeal arches. These hillocks develop into the folds of the auricle and gradually shift upwards and backwards to their final position on the head. En route accessory auricles (also known as preauricular tags) may be left behind. The first three hillocks are derived from the 1st branchial arch and form the tragus, crus of the helix, and helix, respectively.  Cutaneous sensation to these areas is via the trigeminal nerve, the attendant nerve of the 1st branchial arch. The final three hillocks are derived from the second branchial arch and form the antihelix, antitragus, and lobule, respectively. These portions of the ear are supplied by the cervical plexus and a small portion by the facial nerve. This explains why vesicles are classically seen on the auricle in herpes infections of the facial nerve (Ramsay Hunt syndrome type II).[1]
The auricle's functions are to collect sound and transform it into directional and other information. The auricle collects sound and, like a funnel, amplifies the sound and directs it to the auditory canal.[2] The filtering effect of the human pinnae preferentially selects sounds in the frequency range of human speech.
Amplification and modulation[edit]
 The fennec fox uses its distinctive oversized pinnae to radiate excess heat and to amplify the sound of small prey burrowing under the desert sand
Amplification of sound by the pinna, tympanic membrane and middle ear causes an increase in level of about 10 to 15 dB in a frequency range of 1.5 kHz to 7 kHz. This amplification is an important factor in inner ear trauma resulting from elevated sound levels.
Non-electrical hearing apparatuses which were designed to protect hearing (particularly that of musicians and others who work in loud environments) which fit snugly in the concha have been studied by the Institute of Sound and Vibration Research (ISVR) at the University of Southampton in the U.K. [3]
Notch of pinna[edit]
Due to its anatomy, the pinna largely eliminates a small segment of the frequency spectrum; this band is called the pinna notch. The pinna works differently for low and high frequency sounds. For low frequencies, it behaves similarly to a reflector dish, directing sounds toward the ear canal. For high frequencies, however, its value is thought to be more sophisticated. While some of the sounds that enter the ear travel directly to the canal, others reflect off the contours of the pinna first: these enter the ear canal after a very slight delay. This delay causes phase cancellation, virtually eliminating the frequency component whose wave period is twice the delay period. Neighboring frequencies also drop significantly. In the affected frequency band   the pinna notch   the pinna creates a band-stop or notch filtering effect. This filter typically affects sounds around 10 kHz, though it can affect any frequencies from 6   16 kHz. It also is directionally dependent, affecting sounds coming from above more than those coming from straight ahead. This aids in vertical sound localization.[4]
Functions[edit]
 To an impala, the pinna is useful in collecting sound
In animals the function of the pinna is to collect sound, and perform spectral transformations to incoming sounds which enable the process of vertical localization to take place.[2] It collects sound by acting as a funnel, amplifying the sound and directing it to the auditory canal. While reflecting from the pinna, sound also goes through a filtering process, as well as frequency dependent amplitude modulation which adds directional information to the sound (see sound localization, vertical sound localization, head-related transfer function, pinna notch).  In various species, the pinna can also signal mood and radiate heat.
Clinical significance[edit]
There are various visible ear abnormalities:
traumatic injury[5]
infection[6]
wart, mole, birthmark[6]
scars, including keloids[6]
cyst[7]
skin tag[7]
sunburn, frostbite[6]
pressure ulcer, often from a poorly fitting hearing aid[6]
anotia, absent pinna[7]
microtia, underdeveloped pinna[7]
cryptotia, a pinna covered beneath the skin of the scalp[5]
Stahl's deformity, pointed pinna due to an extra fold of cartilage[5]
cupped or constricted ear deformity, a hooded superior helix[5]
preauricular pit[8]
preauricular tag[8]
Darwin's tubercle, protuberance on the anterior helix[6]
hypertrichosis, including hypertrichosis lanuginosa acquisita, a hairy pinna[6]
cauliflower ear, post-traumatic cartilage deformity[6]
tophus, nodule on the pinna related to gout[6]
chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis (Winkler's nodule), a nodule initiated by solar damage[6]
actinic keratosis and cutaneous horn, premalignant lesions caused by solar damage[6]
benign and malignant neoplasm, including tumors, keratoacanthoma, carcinoma[6]
In other species[edit]
Visible auricles are a common trait in mammals, particularly placental mammals and marsupials, but are poorly developed or absent in monotremes. Marine mammals usually have either reduced auricles or no auricals due to sound travelling differently in water than in air, as well as the fact that auricles would potentially slow them down in the water. Skin impressions show large, mouse-like auricles in Spinolestes.
External auricles are absent in other tetrapod groups such as reptiles, amphibians, and birds.
Additional images[edit]
Left human pinna
External ear. Right auricle. Lateral view.
External ear. Right auricle. Lateral view.
External ear. Right auricle. Lateral view.
Male right auricle
See also[edit]
This article uses anatomical terminology.
Earrings for pierced ears
Auriculotherapy
References[edit]
^ Moore, K. L. The Developing Human: Clinically Oriental Embryology, ninth edition. Saunders. p. 445. ISBN 1437720021.
^ a b Middlebrooks, John C.; Green, David M. (1991). "Sound Localization by Human Listeners". Annual Review of Psychology. 42: 135 59. doi:10.1146/annurev.ps.42.020191.001031. PMID 2018391.
^ "Acoustic characterisation of Calmer technology prototypes"
^ "CIPIC International Laboratory". interface.cipic.ucdavis.edu. Archived from the original on 2016-12-21. Retrieved 2016-12-09.
^ a b c d Ear Deformities. Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Hawke, M. (2003) Chapter 1: Diseases of the Pinna. Ear Disease: A Clinical Guide. Hamilton, Ontario. Decker DTC.
^ a b c d Pinna abnormalities and low-set ears. MedlinePlus.
^ a b Neonatal Dermatology: Ear Anomalies. Archived November 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Auckland District Health Board.
External links[edit]
drtbalu otolaryngology online
 Media related to Auricles (anatomy) at Wikimedia Commons
vteAnatomy of hearing and balanceOuter ear
Auricle
helix
antihelix
tragus
antitragus
intertragic notch
earlobe
Ear canal
Auricular muscles
Eardrum
umbo
pars flaccida
Middle earTympanic cavity
Medial structures
oval window
round window
secondary tympanic membrane
prominence of facial canal
promontory of tympanic cavity
Posterior structures
mastoid cells
aditus to mastoid antrum
pyramidal eminence
Ossicles
Malleus
superior ligament
lateral ligament
anterior ligament
Incus
superior ligament
posterior ligament
Stapes
annular ligament
Muscles
stapedius
tensor tympani
Auditory tube /Eustachian tube
Torus tubarius
Inner earLabyrinths
membranous
bony
Auditory systemGeneral
Cochlea
Vestibular duct
Helicotrema
Tympanic duct
Modiolus
Cochlear cupula
Perilymphatic space
Perilymph
Cochlear aqueduct
Cells
Claudius
Boettcher
Cochlear duct /scala media
Reissner's/vestibular membrane
Basilar membrane
Reticular membrane
Endolymph
Stria vascularis
Spiral ligament
Organ of Corti
stereocilia
tip links
Tectorial membrane
Sulcus spiralis
externus
internus
Spiral limbus
Vestibular systemVestibule
Utricle
macula
Saccule
macula
Kinocilium
Otolith
Otolithic membrane
Vestibular aqueduct
endolymphatic duct
endolymphatic sac
Ductus reuniens
Semicircular canals
Superior
Posterior
Horizontal
Ampullary cupula
Ampullae
crista ampullaris
Authority control National
Germany
Israel
United States
Other
Terminologia Anatomica
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Auricle_(anatomy)&oldid=1148632225"