The Circuit Courts of Maryland are the state trial courts of general jurisdiction in Maryland. They are Maryland's highest courts of record exercising original jurisdiction at law and in equity in all civil and criminal matters, and have such additional powers and jurisdiction as conferred by the Maryland Constitution of 1867 as amended, or by law.[1]  The Circuit Courts also preside over divorce and most family law matters. Probate and estate matters are handled by a separate Orphans' Court. The Circuit Courts are the only Maryland state courts empowered to conduct jury trials.
Organization[edit]
 Judicial circuit map
Each of Maryland's 23 counties and the independent city of Baltimore has its own Circuit Court.  The number of judges on each of the Circuit Courts is set by statute.[2] The Circuit Courts are grouped into eight judicial circuits. Each circuit encompasses two or more counties, except for the Eighth Circuit, which consists solely of Baltimore City.[3]  The most senior judge in the circuit is the Chief Judge; all other judges are Associate Judges.[4]
The state is divided into eight judicial circuits, which are presently as follows:
1st Judicial Circuit (7 judges): Dorchester (1 judge), Somerset (1 judge), Wicomico (3 judges) & Worcester (2 judges) counties
2nd Judicial Circuit (7 judges): Caroline (1 judge), Cecil (3 judges), Kent (1 judge), Queen Anne's (1 judge) & Talbot (1 judge) counties
3rd Judicial Circuit (21 judges): Baltimore County (16 judges) & Harford County (5 judges)
4th Judicial Circuit (7 judges): Allegany (2 judges), Garrett (1 judge) & Washington (4 judges) counties
5th Judicial Circuit (18 judges): Anne Arundel (10 judges), Carroll (3 judges) & Howard (5 judges) counties
6th Judicial Circuit (24 judges): Frederick (4 judges) & Montgomery (20 judges) counties
7th Judicial Circuit (32 judges): Calvert (3 judges), Charles (4 judges), Prince George's (23 judges) & St Mary's (3 judges) counties
8th Judicial Circuit (30 judges): Baltimore City
Judges of the Circuit Courts of Maryland are elected to 15-year terms in the general election.[5]  Their salaries may not be diminished while in office.[6]  The Governor may fill vacancies by appointment until the next general election for the United States House of Representatives occurring after one year from the time the vacancy was created, except in cases where the vacancy is by expiration of term, in which case, the vacancy is filled until the next general election for U.S. Representatives (congressmen).[7]
Judges must be at least 30 years old, qualified voters, members of the Maryland bar, and residents both of Maryland for at least five years and for at least 6 months of the place for which they are elected to serve.[8]  Judges must retire at age 70.[5]  The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland may assign a former judge to sit temporarily in any Maryland court, if approved by the administrative judge of the circuit in question.[9]
Each Circuit Court also has its own Clerk, who is elected by the citizens of the county (or Baltimore City) to a four-year term.[10]
Jurisdiction[edit]
In civil matters, the Circuit Courts have exclusive original jurisdiction in most cases in which equitable, declaratory, or injunctive relief is sought, or in which ownership of real property is to be determined. Two notable exceptions are: (1) actions for replevin, in which the District Courts have exclusive original jurisdiction regardless of the value of the thing in controversy;[11]  and (2) landlord-tenant matters, in which the District Court has exclusive original jurisdiction in all cases.[12]
In tort or contract cases for money damages where the amount in controversy exceeds $30,000, the Circuit Courts have exclusive original jurisdiction.[13]  The Circuit Courts share concurrent jurisdiction with the District Courts in such cases where the amount in controversy exceeds $5,000 but is less than $30,000.[14]  However, if the amount in controversy exceeds $25,000, either party may remove an action filed in District Court to the Circuit Court by demanding a jury trial.[15]  The District Court has exclusive jurisdiction in contract and tort cases for money damages where the amount in controversy is less than $5,000.
In criminal cases, the Circuit Courts generally have exclusive original jurisdiction over felonies (with many exceptions).[16]   They share concurrent original jurisdiction in misdemeanor cases in which the penalty may be confinement for three years or more or a fine of $2,500 or more, and in certain felony cases.[17]  A criminal defendant may remove the case to Circuit Court by demanding a jury trial in any case in which the defendant is so entitled.[18]
Dockets[edit]
By rule, each of the Circuit Courts is required to have a differentiated case management plan "for the prompt and efficient scheduling and disposition of actions[.]"[19]   Such plans vary by jurisdiction, but include the classification of cases by complexity and priority, to be assigned to particular scheduling "tracks" based on that classification.[19]   Consistent with applicable court rule, the Circuit Courts have endeavored to make their differentiated case management plans as similar as possible;[20] in practice, however, the plans do vary somewhat among the Circuit Courts.
One noteworthy aspect of Maryland's differentiated case management system is the introduction of the Business and Technology Case Management Program   the first of its kind in the United States   for civil cases involving complex business or technology issues.  The program includes a special designated "track" for business and technology cases within Maryland's differentiated case management system; procedures to assign such cases to the program, including special assignment of such cases to judges specially trained in issues concerning business and technology; and alternative dispute resolution proceedings by mediators specially trained in business and technology issues.[21]  Such cases may be placed into the program by request of the plaintiff upon filing the case; upon a subsequent request by any of the parties; or by court order.
Maryland also permits the parties in civil cases to request assignment of their case to a Complex Science or Medical Case Management Program, which, if granted, results in the case being assigned to a judge who has received training from the Advanced Science and Technology Adjudication Resource Center, Inc. (ASTAR).
References[edit]
^ Annotated Code of Maryland, Courts & Judicial Proceedings Article (hereafter 
"CJP"),  1-501.
^ CJP  1-503.
^ Maryland Constitution, Art. IV,  19.
^ Art. IV,  21.
^ a b Art. IV,  3.
^ Art. IV,  24; CJP  1-701.
^ Maryland Constitution, Art. IV,  5.
^ Art. IV,  2.
^ CJP  1-302.
^ Art. IV,  25.
^ CJP  4-401(2).
^ CJP  4-401(4).
^ See CJP  4-401(1) (defining exclusive jurisdiction of the District Court).
^ CJP  4-402(d)(1)(i).
^ CJP  4-402(e); see also Maryland Declaration of Rights, Art. 23.
^ CJP  4-302(a).
^ CJP  4-302(d).
^ CJP  4-302(e).
^ a b Maryland Rule 16-202(b)(1).
^ Maryland Rule 16-202(b)(2).
^ Maryland Rule 16-308.
External links[edit]
Maryland Judiciary
Maryland Business & Technology Case Management Program
Montgomery County Circuit Court
vteGovernment of MarylandExecutive
Governor (List)
Lt. Governor
Secretary of State
Archives
Aging
Agriculture
Commerce
Education
Environment
General Services
Health
Housing & Community Development
Labor
Natural Resources
Planning
Transportation
Legislative
General Assembly
Senate (Members, President)
House of Delegates (Members, Speaker)
Judicial
Supreme Court (Justices)
Appellate Court
Circuit Court
District Court
Constitutional offices
Comptroller
Treasurer
Attorney General
Board of Public Works
Independent agencies
Commission on Human Relations
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Insurance Administration
Lottery
Office of Administrative Hearings
Public Service Commission
State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy
vteState of MarylandAnnapolis (capital)Topics
Index
Cities
Government
Congressional delegations
Congressional maps
History
Mass media
Newspapers
Radio
TV
People
Symbols
Tourist attractions
Society
African Americans
Culture
Crime
Demographics
Economy
Education
Politics
Sports
Regions
Allegheny Mountains
Atlantic coastal plain
Baltimore Washington metro area
Blue Ridge
Chesapeake
Cumberland Valley
Delaware Valley
Delmarva Peninsula
Eastern Shore
Piedmont
Ridge and Valley
Southern Maryland
Tidewater
Western Maryland
Cities
Aberdeen
Annapolis
Baltimore
Bowie
Brunswick
Cambridge
College Park
Cumberland
Frederick
Gaithersburg
Greenbelt
Hagerstown
Havre de Grace
Laurel
Pocomoke City
Rockville
Salisbury
Takoma Park
Westminster
Towns
Bel Air
Denton
Easton
Elkton
Leonardtown
Ocean City
Port Deposit
Upper Marlboro
CDPs
Arbutus
Arnold
Aspen Hill
Baltimore Highlands
Bethesda
Camp Springs
Carney
Catonsville
Chillum
Clinton
Cockeysville-Hunt Valley
Colesville
Columbia
Crofton
Dundalk
Edgewood
Eldersburg
Elkridge
Ellicott City
Essex
Fairland
Ferndale
Fort Washington
Germantown
Glen Burnie
Green Haven
Hillcrest Heights
Landover
Langley Park
Lanham
Lansdowne
Lochearn
Lutherville
Middle River
Milford Mill
Montgomery Village
Odenton
Olney
Owings Mills
Oxon Hill
Parkville
Perry Hall
Pikesville
Potomac
Randallstown
Redland
Reisterstown
Rosedale
St. Charles
Severn
Severna Park
Silver Spring
South Gate
Suitland
Timonium
Towson
Urbana
Waldorf
Wheaton-Glenmont
White Oak
Woodlawn
Counties
Allegany
Anne Arundel
Baltimore
Calvert
Caroline
Carroll
Cecil
Charles
Dorchester
Frederick
Garrett
Harford
Howard
Kent
Montgomery
Prince George's
Queen Anne's
St. Mary's
Somerset
Talbot
Washington
Wicomico
Worcester
 Maryland portal
vteState governments of the United StatesStates
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Federal districtWashington, D.C.Insular areas
American Samoa
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico 
U.S. Virgin Islands
vteCounty Courthouses in Maryland
Allegany County
Anne Arundel County
Baltimore City
Baltimore County
Caroline County
Cecil County
Dorchester County
Garrett County
Harford County
Howard County
Montgomery County
Queen Anne's County
Talbot County
Washington County
Wicomico County
Worcester County
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maryland_Circuit_Courts&oldid=1145945807"