First crewed Moon landing
"First Moon landing" redirects here. For earlier uncrewed Moon landings, see Moon landing.
This article is about the 1969 crewed lunar mission. For other uses, see Apollo 11 (disambiguation).
Apollo 11Buzz Aldrin on the Moon as photographed by Neil Armstrong (Armstrong seen in the visor reflection along with Earth,[1] the Lunar Module Eagle, and the U.S. flag)Mission typeCrewed lunar landing (G)OperatorNASACOSPAR IDCSM: 1969-059ALM: 1969-059CSATCAT no.CSM: 4039[2]LM: 4041[3]Mission duration8 days, 3 hours, 18 minutes, 35 seconds
Spacecraft propertiesSpacecraftApollo CSM-107Apollo LM-5ManufacturerCSM: North American Rockwell[4]LM: Grumman[4]Launch mass109,646 pounds (49,735 kg)[5]Landing mass10,873 pounds (4,932 kg)
CrewCrew size3MembersNeil A. ArmstrongMichael CollinsEdwin E. Aldrin Jr.CallsignCSM: ColumbiaLM: EagleOn surface: Tranquility Base
Start of missionLaunch dateJuly 16, 1969, 13:32:00 (1969-07-16UTC13:32Z) UTC[6]RocketSaturn V SA-506Launch siteKennedy Space Center LC-39A
End of missionRecovered byUSS HornetLanding dateJuly 24, 1969, 16:50:35 (1969-07-24UTC16:50:36Z); UTCLanding siteNorth Pacific Ocean13 19 N 169 9 W  /  13.317 N 169.150 W  / 13.317; -169.150  (Apollo 11 splashdown)
Orbital parametersReference systemSelenocentricPeriselene altitude100.9 kilometers (54.5 nmi)[7]Aposelene altitude122.4 kilometers (66.1 nmi)[7]Inclination1.25 degrees[7]Period2 hours[7]EpochJuly 19, 1969, 21:44 UTC[7]
Lunar orbiterSpacecraft componentCommand and service moduleOrbital insertionJuly 19, 1969, 17:21:50 UTC[8]Orbital departureJuly 22, 1969, 04:55:42 UTC[9]Orbits30Lunar landerSpacecraft componentApollo Lunar ModuleLanding dateJuly 20, 1969, 20:17:40 UTC[10]Return launchJuly 21, 1969, 17:54:00 UTC[11]Landing siteTranquility Base,Mare Tranquillitatis0 40 27 N 23 28 23 E  /  0.67416 N 23.47314 E  / 0.67416; 23.47314[12]Sample mass21.55 kilograms (47.51 lb)Surface EVAs1EVA duration2 hours, 31 minutes, 40 seconds
Docking with LMDocking dateJuly 16, 1969, 16:56:03 UTC[8]Undocking dateJuly 20, 1969, 17:44:00 UTC[13]Docking with LM ascent stageDocking dateJuly 21, 1969, 21:35:00 UTC[9]Undocking dateJuly 21, 1969, 23:41:31 UTC[9]
Left to right: Neil Armstrong, Michael Collins, Buzz AldrinApollo program Apollo 10Apollo 12 Apollo 11 (July 16 24, 1969) was the American spaceflight that first landed humans on the Moon. Commander Neil Armstrong and lunar module pilot Buzz Aldrin landed the Apollo Lunar Module Eagle on July 20, 1969, at 20:17 UTC, and Armstrong became the first person to step onto the Moon's surface six hours and 39 minutes later, on July 21 at 02:56 UTC. Aldrin joined him 19 minutes later, and they spent about two and a quarter hours together exploring the site they had named Tranquility Base upon landing. Armstrong and Aldrin collected 47.5 pounds (21.5 kg) of lunar material to bring back to Earth as pilot Michael Collins flew the Command Module Columbia in lunar orbit, and were on the Moon's surface for 21 hours, 36 minutes before lifting off to rejoin Columbia.
Apollo 11 was launched by a Saturn V rocket from Kennedy Space Center on Merritt Island, Florida, on July 16 at 13:32 UTC, and it was the fifth crewed mission of NASA's Apollo program. The Apollo spacecraft had three parts: a command module (CM) with a cabin for the three astronauts, the only part that returned to Earth; a service module (SM), which supported the command module with propulsion, electrical power, oxygen, and water; and a lunar module (LM) that had two stages a descent stage for landing on the Moon and an ascent stage to place the astronauts back into lunar orbit.
After being sent to the Moon by the Saturn V's third stage, the astronauts separated the spacecraft from it and traveled for three days until they entered lunar orbit. Armstrong and Aldrin then moved into Eagle and landed in the Sea of Tranquility on July 20. The astronauts used Eagle's ascent stage to lift off from the lunar surface and rejoin Collins in the command module. They jettisoned Eagle before they performed the maneuvers that propelled Columbia out of the last of its 30 lunar orbits onto a trajectory back to Earth.[9] They returned to Earth and splashed down in the Pacific Ocean on July 24 after more than eight days in space.
Armstrong's first step onto the lunar surface was broadcast on live TV to a worldwide audience. He described the event as "one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind."[a][15] Apollo 11 effectively proved US victory in the Space Race to demonstrate spaceflight superiority, by fulfilling a national goal proposed in 1961 by President John F. Kennedy, "before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth."[16]
Background
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the United States was engaged in the Cold War, a geopolitical rivalry with the Soviet Union.[17] On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first artificial satellite. This surprise success fired fears and imaginations around the world. It demonstrated that the Soviet Union had the capability to deliver nuclear weapons over intercontinental distances, and challenged American claims of military, economic and technological superiority.[18] This precipitated the Sputnik crisis, and triggered the Space Race to prove which superpower would achieve superior spaceflight capability.[19] President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded to the Sputnik challenge by creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and initiating Project Mercury,[20] which aimed to launch a man into Earth orbit.[21] But on April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person in space, and the first to orbit the Earth.[22] Nearly a month later, on May 5, 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American in space, completing a 15-minute suborbital journey. After being recovered from the Atlantic Ocean, he received a congratulatory telephone call from Eisenhower's successor, John F. Kennedy.[23]
Since the Soviet Union had higher lift capacity launch vehicles, Kennedy chose, from among options presented by NASA, a challenge beyond the capacity of the existing generation of rocketry, so that the US and Soviet Union would be starting from a position of equality. A crewed mission to the Moon would serve this purpose.[24]
On May 25, 1961, Kennedy addressed the United States Congress on "Urgent National Needs" and declared:I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade [1960s] is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish. We propose to accelerate the development of the appropriate lunar space craft. We propose to develop alternate liquid and solid fuel boosters, much larger than any now being developed, until certain which is superior. We propose additional funds for other engine development and for unmanned explorations explorations which are particularly important for one purpose which this nation will never overlook: the survival of the man who first makes this daring flight. But in a very real sense, it will not be one man going to the Moon if we make this judgment affirmatively, it will be an entire nation. For all of us must work to put him there.  Kennedy's speech to Congress[25]
On September 12, 1962, Kennedy delivered another speech before a crowd of about 40,000 people in the Rice University football stadium in Houston, Texas.[26][27] A widely quoted refrain from the middle portion of the speech reads as follows:
 President John F. Kennedy speaking at Rice University on September 12, 1962
There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer space as yet. Its hazards are hostile to us all. Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation may never come again. But why, some say, the Moon? Why choose this as our goal? And they may well ask, why climb the highest mountain? Why, 35 years ago, fly the Atlantic? Why does Rice play Texas?
We choose to go to the Moon! We choose to go to the Moon ... We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard; because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one we intend to win, and the others, too.[28]
In spite of that, the proposed program faced the opposition of many Americans and was dubbed a "moondoggle" by Norbert Wiener, a mathematician at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.[29][30] The effort to land a man on the Moon already had a name: Project Apollo.[31] When Kennedy met with Nikita Khrushchev, the Premier of the Soviet Union in June 1961, he proposed making the Moon landing a joint project, but Khrushchev did not take up the offer.[32] Kennedy again proposed a joint expedition to the Moon in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly on September 20, 1963.[33] The idea of a joint Moon mission was abandoned after Kennedy's death.[34]
An early and crucial decision was choosing lunar orbit rendezvous over both direct ascent and Earth orbit rendezvous. A space rendezvous is an orbital maneuver in which two spacecraft navigate through space and meet up. In July 1962 NASA head James Webb announced that lunar orbit rendezvous would be used[35][36] and that the Apollo spacecraft would have three major parts: a command module (CM) with a cabin for the three astronauts, and the only part that returned to Earth; a service module (SM), which supported the command module with propulsion, electrical power, oxygen, and water; and a lunar module (LM) that had two stages a descent stage for landing on the Moon, and an ascent stage to place the astronauts back into lunar orbit.[37] This design meant the spacecraft could be launched by a single Saturn V rocket that was then under development.[38]
Technologies and techniques required for Apollo were developed by Project Gemini.[39] The Apollo project was enabled by NASA's adoption of new advances in semiconductor electronic technology, including metal oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) in the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP)[40][41] and silicon integrated circuit (IC) chips in the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC).[42]
Project Apollo was abruptly halted by the Apollo 1 fire on January 27, 1967, in which astronauts Gus Grissom, Ed White, and Roger B. Chaffee died, and the subsequent investigation.[43] In October 1968, Apollo 7 evaluated the command module in Earth orbit,[44] and in December Apollo 8 tested it in lunar orbit.[45] In March 1969, Apollo 9 put the lunar module through its paces in Earth orbit,[46] and in May Apollo 10 conducted a "dress rehearsal" in lunar orbit. By July 1969, all was in readiness for Apollo 11 to take the final step onto the Moon.[47]
The Soviet Union appeared  to be winning the Space Race by beating the US to firsts, but its early lead was overtaken by the US Gemini program and Soviet failure to develop the N1 launcher, which would have been comparable to the Saturn V.[48] The Soviets tried to beat the US to return lunar material to the Earth by means of uncrewed probes. On July 13, three days before Apollo 11's launch, the Soviet Union launched Luna 15, which reached lunar orbit before Apollo 11. During descent, a malfunction caused Luna 15 to crash in Mare Crisium about two hours before Armstrong and Aldrin took off from the Moon's surface to begin their voyage home. The Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories radio telescope in England recorded transmissions from Luna 15 during its descent, and these were released in July 2009 for the 40th anniversary of Apollo 11.[49]
Personnel
Part of a series onApollo 11
Crew
Neil Armstrong   Buzz Aldrin   Michael Collins
Spacecraft
CM-107 Columbia   LM-5 Eagle
Landing site
Tranquility Base
Recovery vessels
Helicopter 66   USS Hornet
Commemoration
Anniversaries   50th Anniversary commemorative coins   Eisenhower dollar   Anthony dollar
Related
British TV coverage   Goodwill messages   In popular culture   Lunar sample display   Missing tapes
vte
Prime crew
Position
Astronaut
Commander
Neil A. ArmstrongSecond and last spaceflight
Command Module Pilot
Michael CollinsSecond and last spaceflight
Lunar Module Pilot
Edwin "Buzz" E. Aldrin Jr.Second and last spaceflight
The initial crew assignment of Commander Neil Armstrong, Command Module Pilot (CMP) Jim Lovell, and Lunar Module Pilot (LMP) Buzz Aldrin on the backup crew for Apollo 9 was officially announced on November 20, 1967.[50] Lovell and Aldrin had previously flown together as the crew of Gemini 12. Due to design and manufacturing delays in the LM, Apollo 8 and Apollo 9 swapped prime and backup crews, and Armstrong's crew became the backup for Apollo 8. Based on the normal crew rotation scheme, Armstrong was then expected to command Apollo 11.[51]
There would be one change. Michael Collins, the CMP on the Apollo 8 crew, began experiencing trouble with his legs. Doctors diagnosed the problem as a bony growth between his fifth and sixth vertebrae, requiring surgery.[52] Lovell took his place on the Apollo 8 crew, and when Collins recovered he joined Armstrong's crew as CMP. In the meantime, Fred Haise filled in as backup LMP, and Aldrin as backup CMP for Apollo 8.[53] Apollo 11 was the second American mission where all the crew members had prior spaceflight experience,[54] the first being Apollo 10.[55] The next was STS-26 in 1988.[54]
Deke Slayton gave Armstrong the option to replace Aldrin with Lovell, since some thought Aldrin was difficult to work with. Armstrong had no issues working with Aldrin but thought it over for a day before declining. He thought Lovell deserved to command his own mission (eventually Apollo 13).[56]
The Apollo 11 prime crew had none of the close cheerful camaraderie characterized by that of Apollo 12. Instead, they forged an amiable working relationship. Armstrong in particular was notoriously aloof, but Collins, who considered himself a loner, confessed to rebuffing Aldrin's attempts to create a more personal relationship.[57] Aldrin and Collins described the crew as "amiable strangers".[58] Armstrong did not agree with the assessment, and said "... all the crews I was on worked very well together."[58]
Backup crew
Position
Astronaut
Commander
James A. Lovell Jr.
Command Module Pilot
William A. Anders
Lunar Module Pilot
Fred W. Haise Jr.
The backup crew consisted of Lovell as Commander, William Anders as CMP, and Haise as LMP. Anders had flown with Lovell on Apollo 8.[54] In early 1969, Anders accepted a job with the National Aeronautics and Space Council effective August 1969, and announced he would retire as an astronaut at that time. Ken Mattingly was moved from the support crew into parallel training with Anders as backup CMP in case Apollo 11 was delayed past its intended July launch date, at which point Anders would be unavailable.[59]
By the normal crew rotation in place during Apollo, Lovell, Mattingly, and Haise were scheduled to fly on Apollo 14, but the three of them were bumped to Apollo 13: there was a crew issue for Apollo 13 as none of them except Edgar Mitchell flew in space again. George Mueller rejected the crew and this was the first time an Apollo crew was rejected. To give Shepard more training time, Lovell's crew were bumped to Apollo 13. Mattingly would later be replaced by Jack Swigert as CMP on Apollo 13. [59]
Support crew
During Projects Mercury and Gemini, each mission had a prime and a backup crew. For Apollo, a third crew of astronauts was added, known as the support crew. The support crew maintained the flight plan, checklists and mission ground rules, and ensured the prime and backup crews were apprised of changes. They developed procedures, especially those for emergency situations, so these were ready for when the prime and backup crews came to train in the simulators, allowing them to concentrate on practicing and mastering them.[60] For Apollo 11, the support crew consisted of Ken Mattingly, Ronald Evans and Bill Pogue.[61]
Capsule communicators
 CAPCOM Charles Duke (left), with backup crewmen Jim Lovell and Fred Haise listening in during Apollo 11's descent
The capsule communicator (CAPCOM) was an astronaut at the Mission Control Center in Houston, Texas, who was the only person who communicated directly with the flight crew.[62] For Apollo 11, the CAPCOMs were: Charles Duke, Ronald Evans, Bruce McCandless II, James Lovell, William Anders, Ken Mattingly, Fred Haise, Don L. Lind, Owen K. Garriott and Harrison Schmitt.[61]
Flight directors
The flight directors for this mission were:[63][64][65][66][67][68]
Apollo 11 flight directors
Name
Shift
Team
Activities
Clifford E. Charlesworth
1
Green
Launch and extravehicular activity (EVA)
Gerald D. Griffin
1
Gold
Backup for shift 1
Gene Kranz
2
White
Lunar landing
Glynn Lunney
3
Black
Lunar ascent
Milton Windler
4
Maroon
Planning
Other key personnel
Other key personnel who played important roles in the Apollo 11 mission include the following.[69]
Other personnel
Name
Activities
Farouk El-Baz
Geologist, studied geology of the Moon, identified landing locations, trained pilots
Kurt Debus
Rocket scientist, supervised construction of launch pads and infrastructure
Jamye Flowers
Secretary for astronauts
Eleanor Foraker
Tailor who designed space suits
Jack Garman
Computer engineer and technician
Millicent Goldschmidt
Microbiologist who designed aseptic lunar material collection techniques and trained astronauts
Eldon C. Hall
Apollo Guidance Computer hardware designer
Margaret Hamilton
Onboard flight computer software engineer
John Houbolt
Route planner
Gene Shoemaker
Geologist who trained astronauts in field geology
Bill Tindall
Coordinated mission techniques
Preparations
Insignia
 Apollo 11 insignia
The Apollo 11 mission emblem was designed by Collins, who wanted a symbol for "peaceful lunar landing by the United States". At Lovell's suggestion, he chose the bald eagle, the national bird of the United States, as the symbol. Tom Wilson, a simulator instructor, suggested an olive branch in its beak to represent their peaceful mission. Collins added a lunar background with the Earth in the distance. The sunlight in the image was coming from the wrong direction; the shadow should have been in the lower part of the Earth instead of the left. Aldrin, Armstrong and Collins decided the Eagle and the Moon would be in their natural colors, and decided on a blue and gold border. Armstrong was concerned that "eleven" would not be understood by non-English speakers, so they went with "Apollo 11",[70] and they decided not to put their names on the patch, so it would "be representative of everyone who had worked toward a lunar landing".[71]
An illustrator at the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC) did the artwork, which was then sent off to NASA officials for approval.[70] The design was rejected. Bob Gilruth, the director of the MSC felt the talons of the eagle looked "too warlike".[72] After some discussion, the olive branch was moved to the talons.[72] When the Eisenhower dollar coin was released in 1971, the patch design provided the eagle for its reverse side.[73] The design was also used for the smaller Susan B. Anthony dollar unveiled in 1979.[74]
Call signs
 Original cockpit of the command module (CM) with three seats, photographed from above. It is located in the National Air and Space Museum, the very high resolution image was produced in 2007 by the Smithsonian Institution.
After the crew of Apollo 10 named their spacecraft Charlie Brown and Snoopy, assistant manager for public affairs Julian Scheer wrote to George Low, the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the MSC, to suggest the Apollo 11 crew be less flippant in naming their craft. The name Snowcone was used for the CM and Haystack was used for the LM in both internal and external communications during early mission planning.[75]
The LM was named Eagle after the motif which was featured prominently on the mission insignia. At Scheer's suggestion, the CM was named Columbia after Columbiad, the giant cannon that launched a spacecraft (also from Florida) in Jules Verne's 1865 novel From the Earth to the Moon. It also referred to Columbia, a historical name of the United States. [76][77] In Collins' 1976 book, he said Columbia was in reference to Christopher Columbus.[78]
Mementos
 Apollo 11 space-flown silver Robbins medallion
The astronauts had personal preference kits (PPKs), small bags containing personal items of significance they wanted to take with them on the mission.[79] Five 0.5-pound (0.23 kg) PPKs were carried on Apollo 11: three (one for each astronaut) were stowed on Columbia before launch, and two on Eagle.[80]
Neil Armstrong's LM PPK contained a piece of wood from the Wright brothers' 1903 Wright Flyer's left propeller and a piece of fabric from its wing,[81] along with a diamond-studded astronaut pin originally given to Slayton by the widows of the Apollo 1 crew. This pin had been intended to be flown on that mission and given to Slayton afterwards, but following the disastrous launch pad fire and subsequent funerals, the widows gave the pin to Slayton. Armstrong took it with him on Apollo 11.[82]
Site selection
Map of Moon showing prospective sites for Apollo 11. Site 2 was chosen.
NASA's Apollo Site Selection Board announced five potential landing sites on February 8, 1968. These were the result of two years' worth of studies based on high-resolution photography of the lunar surface by the five uncrewed probes of the Lunar Orbiter program and information about surface conditions provided by the Surveyor program.[83] The best Earth-bound telescopes could not resolve features with the resolution Project Apollo required.[84] The landing site had to be close to the lunar equator to minimize the amount of propellant required, clear of obstacles to minimize maneuvering, and flat to simplify the task of the landing radar. Scientific value was not a consideration.[85]
Areas that appeared promising on photographs taken on Earth were often found to be totally unacceptable. The original requirement that the site be free of craters had to be relaxed, as no such site was found.[86] Five sites were considered: Sites 1 and 2 were in the Sea of Tranquility (Mare Tranquillitatis); Site 3 was in the Central Bay (Sinus Medii); and Sites 4 and 5 were in the Ocean of Storms (Oceanus Procellarum).[83]
The final site selection was based on seven criteria:
The site needed to be smooth, with relatively few craters;
with approach paths free of large hills, tall cliffs or deep craters that might confuse the landing radar and cause it to issue incorrect readings;
reachable with a minimum amount of propellant;
allowing for delays in the launch countdown;
providing the Apollo spacecraft with a free-return trajectory, one that would allow it to coast around the Moon and safely return to Earth without requiring any engine firings should a problem arise on the way to the Moon;
with good visibility during the landing approach, meaning the Sun would be between 7 and 20 degrees behind the LM; and
a general slope of less than two degrees in the landing area.[83]
The requirement for the Sun angle was particularly restrictive, limiting the launch date to one day per month.[83] A landing just after dawn was chosen to limit the temperature extremes the astronauts would experience.[87] The Apollo Site Selection Board selected Site 2, with Sites 3 and 5 as backups in the event of the launch being delayed. In May 1969, Apollo 10's lunar module flew to within 15 kilometers (9.3 mi) of Site 2, and reported it was acceptable.[88][89]
First-step decision
During the first press conference after the Apollo 11 crew was announced, the first question was, "Which one of you gentlemen will be the first man to step onto the lunar surface?"[90][91] Slayton told the reporter it had not been decided, and Armstrong added that it was "not based on individual desire".[90]
One of the first versions of the egress checklist had the lunar module pilot exit the spacecraft before the commander, which matched what had been done on Gemini missions,[92] where the commander had never performed the spacewalk.[93] Reporters wrote in early 1969 that Aldrin would be the first man to walk on the Moon, and Associate Administrator George Mueller told reporters he would be first as well. Aldrin heard that Armstrong would be the first because Armstrong was a civilian, which made Aldrin livid. Aldrin attempted to persuade other lunar module pilots he should be first, but they responded cynically about what they perceived as a lobbying campaign. Attempting to stem interdepartmental conflict, Slayton told Aldrin that Armstrong would be first since he was the commander. The decision was announced in a press conference on April 14, 1969.[94]
For decades, Aldrin believed the final decision was largely driven by the lunar module's hatch location. Because the astronauts had their spacesuits on and the spacecraft was so small, maneuvering to exit the spacecraft was difficult. The crew tried a simulation in which Aldrin left the spacecraft first, but he damaged the simulator while attempting to egress. While this was enough for mission planners to make their decision, Aldrin and Armstrong were left in the dark on the decision until late spring.[95] Slayton told Armstrong the plan was to have him leave the spacecraft first, if he agreed. Armstrong said, "Yes, that's the way to do it."[96]
The media accused Armstrong of exercising his commander's prerogative to exit the spacecraft first.[97] Chris Kraft revealed in his 2001 autobiography that a meeting occurred between Gilruth, Slayton, Low, and himself to make sure Aldrin would not be the first to walk on the Moon. They argued that the first person to walk on the Moon should be like Charles Lindbergh, a calm and quiet person. They made the decision to change the flight plan so the commander was the first to egress from the spacecraft.[98]
Pre-launch
 Saturn V SA-506, the rocket carrying the Apollo 11 spacecraft, moves out of the Vehicle Assembly Building towards Launch Complex 39.
The ascent stage of LM-5 Eagle arrived at the Kennedy Space Center on January 8, 1969, followed by the descent stage four days later, and CSM-107 Columbia on January 23.[6] There were several differences between Eagle and Apollo 10's LM-4 Snoopy; Eagle had a VHF radio antenna to facilitate communication with the astronauts during their EVA on the lunar surface; a lighter ascent engine; more thermal protection on the landing gear; and a package of scientific experiments known as the Early Apollo Scientific Experiments Package (EASEP). The only change in the configuration of the command module was the removal of some insulation from the forward hatch.[99][100] The CSM was mated on January 29, and moved from the Operations and Checkout Building to the Vehicle Assembly Building on April 14.[6]
The S-IVB third stage of Saturn V AS-506 had arrived on January 18, followed by the S-II second stage on February 6, S-IC first stage on February 20, and the Saturn V Instrument Unit on February 27. At 12:30 on May 20, the 5,443-tonne (5,357-long-ton; 6,000-short-ton) assembly departed the Vehicle Assembly Building atop the crawler-transporter, bound for Launch Pad 39A, part of Launch Complex 39, while Apollo 10 was still on its way to the Moon. A countdown test commenced on June 26, and concluded on July 2. The launch complex was floodlit on the night of July 15, when the crawler-transporter carried the mobile service structure back to its parking area.[6] In the early hours of the morning, the fuel tanks of the S-II and S-IVB stages were filled with liquid hydrogen.[101] Fueling was completed by three hours before launch.[102] Launch operations were partly automated, with 43 programs written in the ATOLL programming language.[103]
Slayton roused the crew shortly after 04:00, and they showered, shaved, and had the traditional pre-flight breakfast of steak and eggs with Slayton and the backup crew. They then donned their space suits and began breathing pure oxygen. At 06:30, they headed out to Launch Complex 39.[104] Haise entered Columbia about three hours and ten minutes before launch time. Along with a technician, he helped Armstrong into the left-hand couch at 06:54. Five minutes later, Collins joined him, taking up his position on the right-hand couch. Finally, Aldrin entered, taking the center couch.[102] Haise left around two hours and ten minutes before launch.[105] The closeout crew sealed the hatch, and the cabin was purged and pressurized. The closeout crew then left the launch complex about an hour before launch time. The countdown became automated at three minutes and twenty seconds before launch time.[102] Over 450 personnel were at the consoles in the firing room.[101]
Mission
Launch and flight to lunar orbit
 The Apollo 11 Saturn V space vehicle lifts off with Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins and Edwin E. Aldrin Jr. at 9:32 a.m. EDT July 16, 1969, from Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39A.
An estimated one million spectators watched the launch of Apollo 11 from the highways and beaches in the vicinity of the launch site. Dignitaries included the Chief of Staff of the United States Army, General William Westmoreland, four cabinet members, 19 state governors, 40 mayors, 60 ambassadors and 200 congressmen. Vice President Spiro Agnew viewed the launch with former president Lyndon B. Johnson and his wife Lady Bird Johnson.[101][106] Around 3,500 media representatives were present.[107] About two-thirds were from the United States; the rest came from 55 other countries. The launch was televised live in 33 countries, with an estimated 25 million viewers in the United States alone. Millions more around the world listened to radio broadcasts.[106][101] President Richard Nixon viewed the launch from his office in the White House with his NASA liaison officer, Apollo astronaut Frank Borman.[108]
Saturn V AS-506 launched Apollo 11 on July 16, 1969, at 13:32:00 UTC (9:32:00 EDT).[6] At 13.2 seconds into the flight, the launch vehicle began to roll into its flight azimuth of 72.058 . Full shutdown of the first-stage engines occurred about 2 minutes and 42 seconds into the mission, followed by separation of the S-IC and ignition of the S-II engines. The second stage engines then cut off and separated at about 9 minutes and 8 seconds, allowing the first ignition of the S-IVB engine a few seconds later.[8]
Apollo 11 entered a near-circular Earth orbit at an altitude of 100.4 nautical miles (185.9 km) by 98.9 nautical miles (183.2 km), twelve minutes into its flight. After one and a half orbits, a second ignition of the S-IVB engine pushed the spacecraft onto its trajectory toward the Moon with the trans-lunar injection (TLI) burn at 16:22:13 UTC. About 30 minutes later, with Collins in the left seat and at the controls, the transposition, docking, and extraction maneuver was performed. This involved separating Columbia from the spent S-IVB stage, turning around, and docking with Eagle still attached to the stage. After the LM was extracted, the combined spacecraft headed for the Moon, while the rocket stage flew on a trajectory past the Moon.[109][8] This was done to avoid the third stage colliding with the spacecraft, the Earth, or the Moon. A slingshot effect from passing around the Moon threw it into an orbit around the Sun.[110]
On July 19 at 17:21:50 UTC, Apollo 11 passed behind the Moon and fired its service propulsion engine to enter lunar orbit.[8][111] In the thirty orbits that followed, the crew saw passing views of their landing site in the southern Sea of Tranquility about 12 miles (19 km) southwest of the crater Sabine D. The site was selected in part because it had been characterized as relatively flat and smooth by the automated Ranger 8 and Surveyor 5 landers and the Lunar Orbiter mapping spacecraft, and because it was unlikely to present major landing or EVA challenges.[112] It lay about 25 kilometers (16 mi) southeast of the Surveyor 5 landing site, and 68 kilometers (42 mi) southwest of Ranger 8's crash site.[113]
Lunar descent
 Columbia in lunar orbit, photographed from Eagle
At 12:52:00 UTC on July 20, Aldrin and Armstrong entered Eagle, and began the final preparations for lunar descent.[8] At 17:44:00 Eagle separated from Columbia.[13] Collins, alone aboard Columbia, inspected Eagle as it pirouetted before him to ensure the craft was not damaged, and that the landing gear was correctly deployed.[114][115] Armstrong exclaimed: "The Eagle has wings!"[115]
As the descent began, Armstrong and Aldrin found themselves passing landmarks on the surface two or three seconds early, and reported that they were "long"; they would land miles west of their target point. Eagle was traveling too fast. The problem could have been mascons concen tra tions of high mass in a region or regions of the Moon's crust that contains a gravitational anomaly, potentially altering Eagle's trajectory. Flight Director Gene Kranz speculated that it could have resulted from extra air pressure in the docking tunnel, or a result of Eagle's pirouette maneuver.[116][117]
Five minutes into the descent burn, and 6,000 feet (1,800 m) above the surface of the Moon, the LM guidance computer (LGC) distracted the crew with the first of several unexpected 1201 and 1202 program alarms. Inside Mission Control Center, computer engineer Jack Garman told Guidance Officer Steve Bales it was safe to continue the descent, and this was relayed to the crew. The program alarms indicated "executive overflows", meaning the guidance computer could not complete all its tasks in real-time and had to postpone some of them.[118][119] Margaret Hamilton, the Director of Apollo Flight Computer Programming at the MIT Charles Stark Draper Laboratory later recalled:
 Eagle in lunar orbit photographed from Columbia
To blame the computer for the Apollo 11 problems is like blaming the person who spots a fire and calls the fire department. Actually, the computer was programmed to do more than recognize error conditions. A complete set of recovery programs was incorporated into the software. The software's action, in this case, was to eliminate lower priority tasks and re-establish the more important ones. The computer, rather than almost forcing an abort, prevented an abort. If the computer hadn't recognized this problem and taken recovery action, I doubt if Apollo 11 would have been the successful Moon landing it was.[120]
During the mission, the cause was diagnosed as the rendezvous radar switch being in the wrong position, causing the computer to process data from both the rendezvous and landing radars at the same time.[121][122] Software engineer Don Eyles concluded in a 2005 Guidance and Control Conference paper that the problem was due to a hardware design bug previously seen during testing of the first uncrewed LM in Apollo 5. Having the rendezvous radar on (so it was warmed up in case of an emergency landing abort) should have been irrelevant to the computer, but an electrical phasing mismatch between two parts of the rendezvous radar system could cause the stationary antenna to appear to the computer as dithering back and forth between two positions, depending upon how the hardware randomly powered up. The extra spurious cycle stealing, as the rendezvous radar updated an involuntary counter, caused the computer alarms.[123]
Landing
 Armstrong pilots Eagle to its landing on the Moon, July 20, 1969.
When Armstrong again looked outside, he saw that the computer's landing target was in a boulder-strewn area just north and east of a 300-foot-diameter (91 m) crater (later determined to be West crater), so he took semi-automatic control.[124][125] Armstrong considered landing short of the boulder field so they could collect geological samples from it, but could not since their horizontal velocity was too high. Throughout the descent, Aldrin called out navigation data to Armstrong, who was busy piloting Eagle. Now 107 feet (33 m) above the surface, Armstrong knew their propellant supply was dwindling and was determined to land at the first possible landing site.[126]
Armstrong found a clear patch of ground and maneuvered the spacecraft towards it. As he got closer, now 250 feet (76 m) above the surface, he discovered his new landing site had a crater in it. He cleared the crater and found another patch of level ground. They were now 100 feet (30 m) from the surface, with only 90 seconds of propellant remaining. Lunar dust kicked up by the LM's engine began to impair his ability to determine the spacecraft's motion. Some large rocks jutted out of the dust cloud, and Armstrong focused on them during his descent so he could determine the spacecraft's speed.[127]
A light informed Aldrin that at least one of the 67-inch (170 cm) probes hanging from Eagle's footpads had touched the surface a few moments before the landing and he said: "Contact light!" Armstrong was supposed to immediately shut the engine down, as the engineers suspected the pressure caused by the engine's own exhaust reflecting off the lunar surface could make it explode, but he forgot. Three seconds later, Eagle landed and Armstrong shut the engine down.[128] Aldrin immediately said "Okay, engine stop. ACA out of detent." Armstrong acknowledged: "Out of detent. Auto." Aldrin continued: "Mode control both auto. Descent engine command override off. Engine arm off. 413 is in."[129]
 Landing site relative to West crater
ACA was the Attitude Control Assembly the LM's control stick. Output went to the LGC to command the reaction control system (RCS) jets to fire. "Out of Detent" meant the stick had moved away from its centered position; it was spring-centered like the turn indicator in a car. LGC address 413 contained the variable that indicated the LM had landed.[10]
Eagle landed at 20:17:40 UTC on Sunday July 20 with 216 pounds (98 kg) of usable fuel remaining. Information available to the crew and mission controllers during the landing showed the LM had enough fuel for another 25 seconds of powered flight before an abort without touchdown would have become unsafe,[10][130] but post-mission analysis showed that the real figure was probably closer to 50 seconds.[131] Apollo 11 landed with less fuel than most subsequent missions, and the astronauts encountered a premature low fuel warning. This was later found to be the result of the propellant sloshing more than expected, uncovering a fuel sensor. On subsequent missions, extra anti-slosh baffles were added to the tanks to prevent this.[10]
Armstrong acknowledged Aldrin's completion of the post-landing checklist with "Engine arm is off", before responding to the CAPCOM, Charles Duke, with the words, "Houston, Tranquility Base here. The Eagle has landed." Armstrong's unrehearsed change of call sign from "Eagle" to "Tranquility Base" emphasized to listeners that landing was complete and successful.[132] Duke mispronounced his reply as he expressed the relief at Mission Control: "Roger, Twan Tranquility, we copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We're breathing again. Thanks a lot."[10][133]
 3-D view from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) of Apollo 11 landing site
Two and a half hours after landing, before preparations began for the EVA, Aldrin radioed to Earth:
This is the LM pilot. I'd like to take this opportunity to ask every person listening in, whoever and wherever they may be, to pause for a moment and contemplate the events of the past few hours and to give thanks in his or her own way.[134]
He then took communion privately. At this time NASA was still fighting a lawsuit brought by atheist Madalyn Murray O'Hair (who had objected to the Apollo 8 crew reading from the Book of Genesis) demanding that their astronauts refrain from broadcasting religious activities while in space. For this reason, Aldrin chose to refrain from directly mentioning taking communion on the Moon. Aldrin was an elder at the Webster Presbyterian Church, and his communion kit was prepared by the pastor of the church, Dean Woodruff. Webster Presbyterian possesses the chalice used on the Moon and commemorates the event each year on the Sunday closest to July 20.[135] The schedule for the mission called for the astronauts to follow the landing with a five-hour sleep period, but they chose to begin preparations for the EVA early, thinking they would be unable to sleep.[136]
Lunar surface operations
 A photograph of Neil Armstrong taken by Buzz Aldrin. This is one of the few photographs of Armstrong on the lunar surface; most of the time he held the camera.
Preparations for Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin to walk on the Moon began at 23:43 UTC.[13] These took longer than expected; three and a half hours instead of two.[137] During training on Earth, everything required had been neatly laid out in advance, but on the Moon the cabin contained a large number of other items as well, such as checklists, food packets, and tools.[138] Six hours and thirty-nine minutes after landing Armstrong and Aldrin were ready to go outside, and Eagle was depressurized.[139]
Eagle's hatch was opened at 02:39:33.[13] Armstrong initially had some difficulties squeezing through the hatch with his portable life support system (PLSS).[137] Some of the highest heart rates recorded from Apollo astronauts occurred during LM egress and ingress.[140] At 02:51 Armstrong began his descent to the lunar surface. The remote control unit on his chest kept him from seeing his feet. Climbing down the nine-rung ladder, Armstrong pulled a D-ring to deploy the modular equipment stowage assembly (MESA) folded against Eagle's side and activate the TV camera.[141][15]
Apollo 11 used slow-scan television (TV) incompatible with broadcast TV, so it was displayed on a special monitor and a conventional TV camera viewed this monitor (thus, a broadcast of a broadcast), significantly reducing the quality of the picture.[142] The signal was received at Goldstone in the United States, but with better fidelity by Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra in Australia. Minutes later the feed was switched to the more sensitive Parkes radio telescope in Australia.[143] Despite some technical and weather difficulties, ghostly black and white images of the first lunar EVA were received and broadcast to at least 600 million people on Earth.[143] Copies of this video in broadcast format were saved and are widely available, but recordings of the original slow scan source transmission from the lunar surface were likely destroyed during routine magnetic tape re-use at NASA.[142]
That's one small step ...
Problems playing this file? See media help.
After describing the surface dust as "very fine-grained" and "almost like a powder",[15] at 02:56:15,[144] six and a half hours after landing, Armstrong stepped off Eagle's landing pad and declared: "That's one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind."[a][145][146]
Armstrong intended to say "That's one small step for a man", but the word "a" is not audible in the transmission, and thus was not initially reported by most observers of the live broadcast. When later asked about his quote, Armstrong said he believed he said "for a man", and subsequent printed versions of the quote included the "a" in square brackets. One explanation for the absence may be that his accent caused him to slur the words "for a" together; another is the intermittent nature of the audio and video links to Earth, partly because of storms near Parkes Observatory. A more recent digital analysis of the tape claims to reveal the "a" may have been spoken but obscured by static. Other analysis points to the claims of static and slurring as "face-saving fabrication", and that Armstrong himself later admitted to misspeaking the line.[147][148][149]
About seven minutes after stepping onto the Moon's surface, Armstrong collected a contingency soil sample using a sample bag on a stick. He then folded the bag and tucked it into a pocket on his right thigh. This was to guarantee there would be some lunar soil brought back in case an emergency required the astronauts to abandon the EVA and return to the LM.[150] Twelve minutes after the sample was collected,[145] he removed the TV camera from the MESA and made a panoramic sweep, then mounted it on a tripod.[137] The TV camera cable remained partly coiled and presented a tripping hazard throughout the EVA. Still photography was accomplished with a Hasselblad camera that could be operated hand held or mounted on Armstrong's Apollo space suit.[151] Aldrin joined Armstrong on the surface. He described the view with the simple phrase: "Magnificent desolation."[15]
Armstrong said moving in the lunar gravity, one-sixth of Earth's, was "even perhaps easier than the simulations ... It's absolutely no trouble to walk around."[15] Aldrin joined him on the surface and tested methods for moving around, including two-footed kangaroo hops. The PLSS backpack created a tendency to tip backward, but neither astronaut had serious problems maintaining balance. Loping became the preferred method of movement. The astronauts reported that they needed to plan their movements six or seven steps ahead. The fine soil was quite slippery. Aldrin remarked that moving from sunlight into Eagle's shadow produced no temperature change inside the suit, but the helmet was warmer in sunlight, so he felt cooler in shadow.[15] The MESA failed to provide a stable work platform and was in shadow, slowing work somewhat. As they worked, the moonwalkers kicked up gray dust, which soiled the outer part of their suits.[151]
 Aldrin salutes the deployed United States flag on the lunar surface.
The astronauts planted the Lunar Flag Assembly containing a flag of the United States on the lunar surface, in clear view of the TV camera. Aldrin remembered, "Of all the jobs I had to do on the Moon the one I wanted to go the smoothest was the flag raising."[152] But the astronauts struggled with the telescoping rod and could only jam the pole about 2 inches (5 cm) into the hard lunar surface. Aldrin was afraid it might topple in front of TV viewers, but gave "a crisp West Point salute".[152] Before Aldrin could take a photo of Armstrong with the flag, President Richard Nixon spoke to them through a telephone-radio transmission, which Nixon called "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House."[153] Nixon originally had a long speech prepared to read during the phone call, but Frank Borman, who was at the White House as a NASA liaison during Apollo 11, convinced Nixon to keep his words brief.[154]
Nixon: Hello, Neil and Buzz. I'm talking to you by telephone from the Oval Room at the White House. And this certainly has to be the most historic telephone call ever made from the White House. I just can't tell you how proud we all are of what you have done. For every American, this has to be the proudest day of our lives. And for people all over the world, I am sure that they too join with Americans in recognizing what an immense feat this is. Because of what you have done, the heavens have become a part of man's world. And as you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to Earth. For one priceless moment in the whole history of man, all the people on this Earth are truly one: one in their pride in what you have done, and one in our prayers that you will return safely to Earth.
Armstrong: Thank you, Mr. President. It's a great honor and privilege for us to be here, representing not only the United States, but men of peace of all nations, and with interest and a curiosity, and men with a vision for the future. It's an honor for us to be able to participate here today.[155][156]
 Aldrin's bootprint; part of an experiment to test the properties of the lunar regolith
They deployed the EASEP, which included a passive seismic experiment package used to measure moonquakes and a retroreflector array used for the lunar laser ranging experiment.[157] Then Armstrong walked 196 feet (60 m) from the LM to snap photos at the rim of Little West Crater while Aldrin collected two core samples. He used the geologist's hammer to pound in the tubes the only time the hammer was used on Apollo 11 but was unable to penetrate more than 6 inches (15 cm) deep. The astronauts then collected rock samples using scoops and tongs on extension handles. Many of the surface activities took longer than expected, so they had to stop documenting sample collection halfway through the allotted 34 minutes. Aldrin shoveled 6 kilograms (13 lb) of soil into the box of rocks in order to pack them in tightly.[158] Two types of rocks were found in the geological samples: basalt and breccia.[159] Three new minerals were discovered in the rock samples collected by the astronauts: armalcolite, tranquillityite, and pyroxferroite. Armalcolite was named after Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. All have subsequently been found on Earth.[160]
 The plaque left on the ladder of Eagle
While on the surface, Armstrong uncovered a plaque mounted on the LM ladder, bearing two drawings of Earth (of the Western and Eastern Hemispheres), an inscription, and signatures of the astronauts and President Nixon. The inscription read:
Here men from the planet Earth first set foot upon the Moon July 1969, A. D. We came in peace for all mankind.[15]
At the behest of the Nixon administration to add a reference to God, NASA included the vague date as a reason to include A.D., which stands for Anno Domini, "in the year of our Lord" (although it should have been placed before the year, not after).[161]
Mission Control used a coded phrase to warn Armstrong his metabolic rates were high, and that he should slow down. He was moving rapidly from task to task as time ran out. As metabolic rates remained generally lower than expected for both astronauts throughout the walk, Mission Control granted the astronauts a 15-minute extension.[157] In a 2010 interview, Armstrong explained that NASA limited the first moonwalk's time and distance because there was no empirical proof of how much cooling water the astronauts' PLSS backpacks would consume to handle their body heat generation while working on the Moon.[162]
Lunar ascent
Aldrin entered Eagle first. With some difficulty the astronauts lifted film and two sample boxes containing 21.55 kilograms (47.5 lb) of lunar surface material to the LM hatch using a flat cable pulley device called the Lunar Equipment Conveyor (LEC). This proved to be an inefficient tool, and later missions preferred to carry equipment and samples up to the LM by hand.[137] Armstrong reminded Aldrin of a bag of memorial items in his sleeve pocket, and Aldrin tossed the bag down. Armstrong then jumped onto the ladder's third rung, and climbed into the LM. After transferring to LM life support, the explorers lightened the ascent stage for the return to lunar orbit by tossing out their PLSS backpacks, lunar overshoes, an empty Hasselblad camera, and other equipment. The hatch was closed again at 05:11:13. They then pressurized the LM and settled down to sleep.[163]
 Aldrin next to the Passive Seismic Experiment Package with Lunar Module Eagle in the background
Presidential speech writer William Safire had prepared an In Event of Moon Disaster announcement for Nixon to read in the event the Apollo 11 astronauts were stranded on the Moon.[164] The remarks were in a memo from Safire to Nixon's White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman, in which Safire suggested a protocol the administration might follow in reaction to such a disaster.[165][166] According to the plan, Mission Control would "close down communications" with the LM, and a clergyman would "commend their souls to the deepest of the deep" in a public ritual likened to burial at sea. The last line of the prepared text contained an allusion to Rupert Brooke's World War I poem "The Soldier".[166]
While moving inside the cabin, Aldrin accidentally damaged the circuit breaker that would arm the main engine for liftoff from the Moon. There was a concern this would prevent firing the engine, stranding them on the Moon. The nonconductive tip of a Duro felt-tip pen[167] was sufficient to activate the switch.[163]
After more than 21+1 2 hours on the lunar surface, in addition to the scientific instruments, the astronauts left behind: an Apollo 1 mission patch in memory of astronauts Roger Chaffee, Gus Grissom, and Edward White, who died when their command module caught fire during a test in January 1967; two memorial medals of Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Komarov and Yuri Gagarin, who died in 1967 and 1968 respectively; a memorial bag containing a gold replica of an olive branch as a traditional symbol of peace; and a silicon message disk carrying the goodwill statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon along with messages from leaders of 73 countries around the world.[168] The disk also carries a listing of the leadership of the US Congress, a listing of members of the four committees of the House and Senate responsible for the NASA legislation, and the names of NASA's past and then-current top management.[169]
 Map showing landing site and photos taken
After about seven hours of rest, the crew was awakened by Houston to prepare for the return flight. Two and a half hours later, at 17:54:00 UTC, they lifted off in Eagle's ascent stage to rejoin Collins aboard Columbia in lunar orbit.[145] Film taken from the LM ascent stage upon liftoff from the Moon reveals the American flag, planted some 25 feet (8 m) from the descent stage, whipping violently in the exhaust of the ascent stage engine. Aldrin looked up in time to witness the flag topple: "The ascent stage of the LM separated ... I was concentrating on the computers, and Neil was studying the attitude indicator, but I looked up long enough to see the flag fall over."[170] Subsequent Apollo missions planted their flags farther from the LM.[171]
Columbia in lunar orbit
During his day flying solo around the Moon, Collins never felt lonely. Although it has been said "not since Adam has any human known such solitude",[172] Collins felt very much a part of the mission. In his autobiography he wrote: "this venture has been structured for three men, and I consider my third to be as necessary as either of the other two".[172] In the 48 minutes of each orbit when he was out of radio contact with the Earth while Columbia passed round the far side of the Moon, the feeling he reported was not fear or loneliness, but rather "awareness, anticipation, satisfaction, confidence, almost exultation".[172]
One of Collins' first tasks was to identify the lunar module on the ground. To give Collins an idea where to look, Mission Control radioed that they believed the lunar module landed about 4 miles (6.4 km) off target. Each time he passed over the suspected lunar landing site, he tried in vain to find the module. On his first orbits on the back side of the Moon, Collins performed maintenance activities such as dumping excess water produced by the fuel cells and preparing the cabin for Armstrong and Aldrin to return.[173]
Just before he reached the dark side on the third orbit, Mission Control informed Collins there was a problem with the temperature of the coolant. If it became too cold, parts of Columbia might freeze. Mission Control advised him to assume manual control and implement Environmental Control System Malfunction Procedure 17. Instead, Collins flicked the switch on the system from automatic to manual and back to automatic again, and carried on with normal housekeeping chores, while keeping an eye on the temperature. When Columbia came back around to the near side of the Moon again, he was able to report that the problem had been resolved. For the next couple of orbits, he described his time on the back side of the Moon as "relaxing". After Aldrin and Armstrong completed their EVA, Collins slept so he could be rested for the rendezvous. While the flight plan called for Eagle to meet up with Columbia, Collins was prepared for a contingency in which he would fly Columbia down to meet Eagle.[174]
Return
 Eagle's ascent stage approaching Columbia
Eagle rendezvoused with Columbia at 21:24 UTC on July 21, and the two docked at 21:35. Eagle's ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit at 23:41.[9] Just before the Apollo 12 flight, it was noted that Eagle was still likely to be orbiting the Moon. Later NASA reports mentioned that Eagle's orbit had decayed, resulting in it impacting in an "uncertain location" on the lunar surface.[175] In 2021, however, some calculations show that the lander may still be in orbit.[176]
On July 23, the last night before splashdown, the three astronauts made a television broadcast in which Collins commented:  ... The Saturn V rocket which put us in orbit is an incredibly complicated piece of machinery, every piece of which worked flawlessly ... We have always had confidence that this equipment will work properly. All this is possible only through the blood, sweat, and tears of a number of people ... All you see is the three of us, but beneath the surface are thousands and thousands of others, and to all of those, I would like to say, "Thank you very much."[177]
Aldrin added: This has been far more than three men on a mission to the Moon; more, still, than the efforts of a government and industry team; more, even, than the efforts of one nation. We feel that this stands as a symbol of the insatiable curiosity of all mankind to explore the unknown ... Personally, in reflecting on the events of the past several days, a verse from Psalms comes to mind. "When I consider the heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the Moon and the stars, which Thou hast ordained; What is man that Thou art mindful of him?"[177][178]
Armstrong concluded: The responsibility for this flight lies first with history and with the giants of science who have preceded this effort; next with the American people, who have, through their will, indicated their desire; next with four administrations and their Congresses, for implementing that will; and then, with the agency and industry teams that built our spacecraft, the Saturn, the Columbia, the Eagle, and the little EMU, the spacesuit and backpack that was our small spacecraft out on the lunar surface. We would like to give special thanks to all those Americans who built the spacecraft; who did the construction, design, the tests, and put their hearts and all their abilities into those craft. To those people tonight, we give a special thank you, and to all the other people that are listening and watching tonight, God bless you. Good night from Apollo 11.[177] 
On the return to Earth, a bearing at the Guam tracking station failed, potentially preventing communication on the last segment of the Earth return. A regular repair was not possible in the available time but the station director, Charles Force, had his ten-year-old son Greg use his small hands to reach into the housing and pack it with grease. Greg was later thanked by Armstrong.[179]
Splashdown and quarantine
 Columbia floats on the ocean as Navy divers assist in retrieving the astronauts.
The aircraft carrier USS Hornet, under the command of Captain Carl J. Seiberlich,[180] was selected as the primary recovery ship (PRS) for Apollo 11 on June 5, replacing its sister ship, the LPH USS Princeton, which had recovered Apollo 10 on May 26. Hornet was then at her home port of Long Beach, California.[181] On reaching Pearl Harbor on July 5, Hornet embarked the Sikorsky SH-3 Sea King helicopters of HS-4, a unit which specialized in recovery of Apollo spacecraft, specialized divers of UDT Detachment Apollo, a 35-man NASA recovery team, and about 120 media representatives. To make room, most of Hornet's air wing was left behind in Long Beach. Special recovery equipment was also loaded, including a boilerplate command module used for training.[182]
On July 12, with Apollo 11 still on the launch pad, Hornet departed Pearl Harbor for the recovery area in the central Pacific,[183] in the vicinity of 10 36 N 172 24 E  /  10.600 N 172.400 E  / 10.600; 172.400.[184] A presidential party consisting of Nixon, Borman, Secretary of State William P. Rogers and National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger flew to Johnston Atoll on Air Force One, then to the command ship USS Arlington in Marine One. After a night on board, they would fly to Hornet in Marine One for a few hours of ceremonies. On arrival aboard Hornet, the party was greeted by the Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Command (CINCPAC), Admiral John S. McCain Jr., and NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine, who flew to Hornet from Pago Pago in one of Hornet's carrier onboard delivery aircraft.[185]
Weather satellites were not yet common, but US Air Force Captain Hank Brandli had access to top-secret spy satellite images. He realized that a storm front was headed for the Apollo recovery area. Poor visibility which could make locating the capsule difficult, and strong upper-level winds which "would have ripped their parachutes to shreds" according to Brandli, posed a serious threat to the safety of the mission.[186] Brandli alerted Navy Captain Willard S. Houston Jr., the commander of the Fleet Weather Center at Pearl Harbor, who had the required security clearance. On their recommendation, Rear Admiral Donald C. Davis, commander of Manned Spaceflight Recovery Forces, Pacific, advised NASA to change the recovery area, each man risking his career. A new location was selected 215 nautical miles (398 km) northeast.[187][188]
This altered the flight plan. A different sequence of computer programs was used, one never before attempted. In a conventional entry, trajectory event P64 was followed by P67. For a skip-out re-entry, P65 and P66 were employed to handle the exit and entry parts of the skip. In this case, because they were extending the re-entry but not actually skipping out, P66 was not invoked and instead, P65 led directly to P67. The crew were also warned they would not be in a full-lift (heads-down) attitude when they entered P67.[187] The first program's acceleration subjected the astronauts to 6.5 standard gravities (64 m/s2); the second, to 6.0 standard gravities (59 m/s2).[189]
Before dawn on July 24, Hornet launched four Sea King helicopters and three Grumman E-1 Tracers. Two of the E-1s were designated as "air boss" while the third acted as a communications relay aircraft. Two of the Sea Kings carried divers and recovery equipment. The third carried photographic equipment, and the fourth carried the decontamination swimmer and the flight surgeon.[190] At 16:44 UTC (05:44 local time) Columbia's drogue parachutes were deployed. This was observed by the helicopters. Seven minutes later Columbia struck the water forcefully 2,660 km (1,440 nmi) east of Wake Island, 380 km (210 nmi) south of Johnston Atoll, and 24 km (13 nmi) from Hornet,[9][187] at 13 19 N 169 9 W  /  13.317 N 169.150 W  / 13.317; -169.150.[191] 82 F (28 C) with 6 feet (1.8 m) seas and winds at 17 knots (31 km/h; 20 mph) from the east were reported under broken clouds at 1,500 feet (460 m) with visibility of 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) at the recovery site.[192] Reconnaissance aircraft flying to the original splashdown location reported the conditions Brandli and Houston had predicted.[193]
During splashdown, Columbia landed upside down but was righted within ten minutes by flotation bags activated by the astronauts.[194] A diver from the Navy helicopter hovering above attached a sea anchor to prevent it from drifting.[195] More divers attached flotation collars to stabilize the module and positioned rafts for astronaut extraction.[196]
Crew of Apollo 11 in quarantine after returning to Earth, visited by Richard NixonApollo 11 Mobile Quarantine Facility on display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Virginia in 2009
The divers then passed biological isolation garments (BIGs) to the astronauts, and assisted them into the life raft. The possibility of bringing back pathogens from the lunar surface was considered remote, but NASA took precautions at the recovery site. The astronauts were rubbed down with a sodium hypochlorite solution and Columbia wiped with Povidone-iodine to remove any lunar dust that might be present. The astronauts were winched on board the recovery helicopter. BIGs were worn until they reached isolation facilities on board Hornet. The raft containing decontamination materials was intentionally sunk.[194]
After touchdown on Hornet at 17:53 UTC, the helicopter was lowered by the elevator into the hangar bay, where the astronauts walked the 30 feet (9.1 m) to the Mobile quarantine facility (MQF), where they would begin the Earth-based portion of their 21 days of quarantine.[197] This practice would continue for two more Apollo missions, Apollo 12 and Apollo 14, before the Moon was proven to be barren of life, and the quarantine process dropped.[198][199] Nixon welcomed the astronauts back to Earth. He told them: "[A]s a result of what you've done, the world has never been closer together before."[200]
After Nixon departed, Hornet was brought alongside the 5-short-ton (4.5 t) Columbia, which was lifted aboard by the ship's crane, placed on a dolly and moved next to the MQF. It was then attached to the MQF with a flexible tunnel, allowing the lunar samples, film, data tapes and other items to be removed. Hornet returned to Pearl Harbor, where the MQF was loaded onto a Lockheed C-141 Starlifter and airlifted to the Manned Spacecraft Center. The astronauts arrived at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at 10:00 UTC on July 28. Columbia was taken to Ford Island for deactivation, and its pyrotechnics made safe. It was then taken to Hickham Air Force Base, from whence it was flown to Houston in a Douglas C-133 Cargomaster, reaching the Lunar Receiving Laboratory on July 30.[201]
In accordance with the Extra-Terrestrial Exposure Law, a set of regulations promulgated by NASA on July 16 to codify its quarantine protocol,[202] the astronauts continued in quarantine. After three weeks in confinement (first in the Apollo spacecraft, then in their trailer on Hornet, and finally in the Lunar Receiving Laboratory), the astronauts were given a clean bill of health.[203] On August 10, 1969, the Interagency Committee on Back Contamination met in Atlanta and lifted the quarantine on the astronauts, on those who had joined them in quarantine (NASA physician William Carpentier and MQF project engineer John Hirasaki),[204] and on Columbia itself. Loose equipment from the spacecraft remained in isolation until the lunar samples were released for study.[205]
Celebrations
 Ticker tape parade in New York City
On August 13, the three astronauts rode in ticker-tape parades in their honor in New York and Chicago, with an estimated six million attendees.[206][207] On the same evening in Los Angeles there was an official state dinner to celebrate the flight, attended by members of Congress, 44 governors, Chief Justice of the United States Warren E. Burger and his predecessor, Earl Warren, and ambassadors from 83 nations at the Century Plaza Hotel. Nixon and Agnew honored each astronaut with a presentation of the Presidential Medal of Freedom.[206][208]
The three astronauts spoke before a joint session of Congress on September 16, 1969. They presented two US flags, one to the House of Representatives and the other to the Senate, that they had carried with them to the surface of the Moon.[209] The flag of American Samoa on Apollo 11 is on display at the Jean P. Haydon Museum in Pago Pago, the capital of American Samoa.[210]
This celebration began a 38-day world tour that brought the astronauts to 22 foreign countries and included visits with the leaders of many countries.[211] The crew toured from September 29 to November 5.[211][212][213] Many nations honored the first human Moon landing with special features in magazines or by issuing Apollo 11 commemorative postage stamps or coins.[214]
Legacy
Cultural significance
Main article: Apollo 11 in popular culture
 A girl holding The Washington Post newspaper stating "'The Eagle Has Landed'   Two Men Walk on the Moon"
Humans walking on the Moon and returning safely to Earth accomplished Kennedy's goal set eight years earlier. In Mission Control during the Apollo 11 landing, Kennedy's speech flashed on the screen, followed by the words "TASK ACCOMPLISHED, July 1969".[215] The success of Apollo 11 demonstrated the United States' technological superiority;[215] and with the success of Apollo 11, America had won the Space Race.[216][217]
New phrases permeated into the English language. "If they can send a man to the Moon, why can't they ...?" became a common saying following Apollo 11.[218] Armstrong's words on the lunar surface also spun off various parodies.[216]
While most people celebrated the accomplishment, disenfranchised Americans saw it as a symbol of the divide in America, evidenced by protesters led by Ralph Abernathy outside of Kennedy Space Center the day before Apollo 11 launched.[219] NASA Administrator Thomas Paine met with Abernathy at the occasion, both hoping that the space program can spur progress also in other regards, such as poverty in the US.[220] Paine was then asked, and agreed, to host protesters as spectators at the launch,[220] and Abernathy, awestruck by the spectacle,[107] prayed for the astronauts.[220] Racial and financial inequalities frustrated citizens who wondered why money spent on the Apollo program was not spent taking care of humans on Earth. A poem by Gil Scott-Heron called "Whitey on the Moon" (1970) illustrated the racial inequality in the United States that was highlighted by the Space Race.[216][221][222] The poem starts with:
A rat done bit my sister Nell.
(with Whitey on the moon)
Her face and arms began to swell.
(and Whitey's on the moon)
I can't pay no doctor bill.
(but Whitey's on the moon)
Ten years from now I'll be paying still.
(while Whitey's on the moon)
[...][222]
Twenty percent of the world's population watched humans walk on the Moon for the first time. While Apollo 11 sparked the interest of the world, the follow-on Apollo missions did not hold the interest of the nation.[215] One possible explanation was the shift in complexity. Landing someone on the Moon was an easy goal to understand; lunar geology was too abstract for the average person. Another is that Kennedy's goal of landing humans on the Moon had already been accomplished.[223] A well-defined objective helped Project Apollo accomplish its goal, but after it was completed it was hard to justify continuing the lunar missions.[224][225]
While most Americans were proud of their nation's achievements in space exploration, only once during the late 1960s did the Gallup Poll indicate that a majority of Americans favored "doing more" in space as opposed to "doing less". By 1973, 59 percent of those polled favored cutting spending on space exploration. The Space Race had been won, and Cold War tensions were easing as the US and Soviet Union entered the era of d tente. This was also a time when inflation was rising, which put pressure on the government to reduce spending. What saved the space program was that it was one of the few government programs that had achieved something great. Drastic cuts, warned Caspar Weinberger, the deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget, might send a signal that "our best years are behind us".[226]
After the Apollo 11 mission, officials from the Soviet Union said landing humans on the Moon was dangerous and unnecessary. At the time the Soviet Union was attempting to retrieve lunar samples robotically. The Soviets publicly denied there was a race to the Moon, and indicated they were not making an attempt.[227] Mstislav Keldysh said in July 1969, "We are concentrating wholly on the creation of large satellite systems." It was revealed in 1989 that the Soviets had tried to send people to the Moon, but were unable due to technological difficulties.[228] The public's reaction in the Soviet Union was mixed. The Soviet government limited the release of information about the lunar landing, which affected the reaction. A portion of the populace did not give it any attention, and another portion was angered by it.[229]
The Apollo 11 landing is referenced in the songs "Armstrong, Aldrin and Collins" by The Byrds on the 1969 album Ballad of Easy Rider and "Coon on the Moon" by Howlin' Wolf on the 1973 album The Back Door Wolf.
Spacecraft
 Columbia on display in the Milestones of Flight exhibition hall at the National Air and Space Museum
The command module Columbia went on a tour of the United States, visiting 49 state capitals, the District of Columbia, and Anchorage, Alaska.[230] In 1971, it was transferred to the Smithsonian Institution, and was displayed at the National Air and Space Museum (NASM) in Washington, DC.[231] It was in the central Milestones of Flight exhibition hall in front of the Jefferson Drive entrance, sharing the main hall with other pioneering flight vehicles such as the Wright Flyer, Spirit of St. Louis, Bell X-1, North American X-15 and Friendship 7.[232]
Columbia was moved in 2017 to the NASM Mary Baker Engen Restoration Hangar at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Chantilly, Virginia, to be readied for a four-city tour titled Destination Moon: The Apollo 11 Mission. This included Space Center Houston from October 14, 2017, to March 18, 2018, the Saint Louis Science Center from April 14 to September 3, 2018, the Senator John Heinz History Center in Pittsburgh from September 29, 2018, to February 18, 2019, and its last location at Museum of Flight in Seattle from March 16 to September 2, 2019.[231][233] Continued renovations at the Smithsonian allowed time for an additional stop for the capsule, and it was moved to the Cincinnati Museum Center. The ribbon cutting ceremony was on September 29, 2019.[234]
For 40 years Armstrong's and Aldrin's space suits were displayed in the museum's Apollo to the Moon exhibit,[235] until it permanently closed on December 3, 2018, to be replaced by a new gallery which was scheduled to open in 2022. A special display of Armstrong's suit was unveiled for the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11 in July 2019.[236][237] The quarantine trailer, the flotation collar and the flotation bags are in the Smithsonian's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center annex near Washington Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Virginia, where they are on display along with a test lunar module.[238][239][240]
The descent stage of the LM Eagle remains on the Moon. In 2009, the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) imaged the various Apollo landing sites on the surface of the Moon, for the first time with sufficient resolution to see the descent stages of the lunar modules, scientific instruments, and foot trails made by the astronauts.[241] The remains of the ascent stage lie at an unknown location on the lunar surface, after being abandoned and impacting the Moon. The location is uncertain because Eagle ascent stage was not tracked after it was jettisoned, and the lunar gravity field is sufficiently non-uniform to make the orbit of the spacecraft unpredictable after a short time.[242]
F-1 Engine Injector Plate on temporary display at the Cincinnati Museum Center in 2019
In March 2012 a team of specialists financed by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos located the F-1 engines from the S-IC stage that launched Apollo 11 into space. They were found on the Atlantic seabed using advanced sonar scanning.[243] His team brought parts of two of the five engines to the surface. In July 2013, a conservator discovered a serial number under the rust on one of the engines raised from the Atlantic, which NASA confirmed was from Apollo 11.[244][245] The S-IVB third stage which performed Apollo 11's trans-lunar injection remains in a solar orbit near to that of Earth.[246]
 Pieces of fabric and wood from the first airplane, the 1903 Wright Flyer, traveled to the Moon in the lunar module and are displayed at the Wright Brothers National Memorial.
Moon rocks
The main repository for the Apollo Moon rocks is the Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. For safekeeping, there is also a smaller collection stored at White Sands Test Facility near Las Cruces, New Mexico. Most of the rocks are stored in nitrogen to keep them free of moisture. They are handled only indirectly, using special tools. Over 100 research laboratories worldwide conduct studies of the samples; approximately 500 samples are prepared and sent to investigators every year.[247][248]
In November 1969, Nixon asked NASA to make up about 250 presentation Apollo 11 lunar sample displays for 135 nations, the fifty states of the United States and its possessions, and the United Nations. Each display included Moon dust from Apollo 11 and flags, including the one of the Soviet Union, taken along by Apollo 11. The rice-sized particles were four small pieces of Moon soil weighing about 50 mg and were enveloped in a clear acrylic button about as big as a United States half dollar coin. This acrylic button magnified the grains of lunar dust. Nixon gave the Apollo 11 lunar sample displays as goodwill gifts in 1970.[249][250]
Experiment results
The Passive Seismic Experiment ran until the command uplink failed on August 25, 1969. The downlink failed on December 14, 1969.[251] As of 2018[update], the Lunar Laser Ranging experiment remains operational.[252]
Armstrong's camera
Armstrong's Hasselblad camera was thought to be lost or left on the Moon surface.[253]
LM memorabilia
In 2015, after Armstrong died in 2012, his widow contacted the National Air and Space Museum to inform them she had found a white cloth bag in one of Armstrong's closets. The bag contained various items, which should have been left behind in the lunar module, including the 16mm Data Acquisition Camera that had been used to capture images of the first Moon landing.[254][255] The camera is currently on display at the National Air and Space Museum.[256]
Anniversary events
Further information: Apollo 11 anniversaries
40th anniversary
 Columbia at the Mary Baker Engen Restoration Hangar
On July 15, 2009, Life.com released a photo gallery of previously unpublished photos of the astronauts taken by Life photographer Ralph Morse prior to the Apollo 11 launch.[257] From July 16 to 24, 2009, NASA streamed the original mission audio on its website in real time 40 years to the minute after the events occurred.[258] It is in the process of restoring the video footage and has released a preview of key moments.[259] In July 2010, air-to-ground voice recordings and film footage shot in Mission Control during the Apollo 11 powered descent and landing was re-synchronized and released for the first time.[260] The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum set up an Adobe Flash website that rebroadcasts the transmissions of Apollo 11 from launch to landing on the Moon.[261]
On July 20, 2009, Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins met with US President Barack Obama at the White House.[262] "We expect that there is, as we speak, another generation of kids out there who are looking up at the sky and are going to be the next Armstrong, Collins, and Aldrin", Obama said. "We want to make sure that NASA is going to be there for them when they want to take their journey."[263] On August 7, 2009, an act of Congress awarded the three astronauts a Congressional Gold Medal, the highest civilian award in the United States. The bill was sponsored by Florida Senator Bill Nelson and Florida Representative Alan Grayson.[264][265]
A group of British scientists interviewed as part of the anniversary events reflected on the significance of the Moon landing:
It was carried out in a technically brilliant way with risks taken ... that would be inconceivable in the risk-averse world of today ... The Apollo programme is arguably the greatest technical achievement of mankind to date ... nothing since Apollo has come close [to] the excitement that was generated by those astronauts Armstrong, Aldrin and the 10 others who followed them.[266]
50th anniversary
Further information: Apollo 11 50th Anniversary commemorative coins
On June 10, 2015, Congressman Bill Posey introduced resolution H.R. 2726 to the 114th session of the United States House of Representatives directing the United States Mint to design and sell commemorative coins in gold, silver and clad for the 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission. On January 24, 2019, the Mint released the Apollo 11 Fiftieth Anniversary commemorative coins to the public on its website.[267][268]
A documentary film, Apollo 11, with restored footage of the 1969 event, premiered in IMAX on March 1, 2019, and broadly in theaters on March 8.[269][270]
The Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum and NASA sponsored the "Apollo 50 Festival" on the National Mall in Washington DC. The three day (July 18 to 20, 2019) outdoor festival featured hands-on exhibits and activities, live performances, and speakers such as Adam Savage and NASA scientists.[271]
 Saturn V rocket projected onto the Washington Monument during the Apollo 11 50th anniversary show
As part of the festival, a projection of the 363-foot (111 m) tall Saturn V rocket was displayed on the east face of the 555-foot (169 m) tall Washington Monument from July 16 through the 20th from 9:30 pm until 11:30 pm (EDT). The program also included a 17-minute show that combined full-motion video projected on the Washington Monument to recreate the assembly and launch of the Saturn V rocket. The projection was joined by a 40-foot (12 m) wide recreation of the Kennedy Space Center countdown clock and two large video screens showing archival footage to recreate the time leading up to the moon landing. There were three shows per night on July 19 20, with the last show on Saturday, delayed slightly so the portion where Armstrong first set foot on the Moon would happen exactly 50 years to the second after the actual event.[272]
On July 19, 2019, the Google Doodle paid tribute to the Apollo 11 Moon Landing, complete with a link to an animated YouTube video with voiceover by astronaut Michael Collins.[273][274]
Aldrin, Collins, and Armstrong's sons were hosted by President Donald Trump in the Oval Office.[275][276]
Films and documentaries
Footprints on the Moon, a 1969 documentary film by Bill Gibson and Barry Coe, about the Apollo 11 mission[277]
Moonwalk One, a 1971 documentary film by Theo Kamecke[278]
Apollo 11: As it Happened, a 1994 six-hour documentary on ABC News' coverage of the event[279]
Apollo 11, a 2019 documentary film by Todd Douglas Miller with restored footage of the 1969 event[280][281]
Chasing the Moon, a July 2019 PBS three-night six-hour documentary, directed by Robert Stone, examined the events leading up to the Apollo 11 mission. An accompanying book of the same name was also released.[282]
8 Days: To the Moon and Back, a PBS and BBC Studios 2019 documentary film by Anthony Philipson re-enacting major portions of the Apollo 11 mission using mission audio recordings, new studio footage, NASA and news archives, and computer-generated imagery.[283]
See also
Apollo in Real Time  Interactive website of Apollo 11, 13, and 17
Exploration of the Moon  Missions to the Moon
List of missions to the Moon
Moon landing conspiracy theories
References
Notes
^ a b Eric Jones of the Apollo Lunar Surface Journal explains that the indefinite article "a" was intended, whether or not it was said; the intention was to contrast a man (an individual's action) and mankind (as a species).[14]
Citations
In some of the following sources, times are shown in the format hours:minutes:seconds (e.g. 109:24:15), referring to the mission's Ground Elapsed Time (GET),[284] based on the official launch time of July 16, 1969, 13:32:00 UTC (000:00:00 GET).[105][6]
^ Byrne., Dave (July 8, 2019). "Apollo 11 Image Library". hq.nasa.gov. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved June 10, 2021.
^ "Apollo 11 Command and Service Module (CSM)". NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive. Archived from the original on February 10, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2019.
^ "Apollo 11 Lunar Module / EASEP". NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive. Archived from the original on August 3, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2019.
^ a b "Apollo 11 Press Kit" (PDF). history.nasa.gov. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 6, 2023. Retrieved December 16, 2022.
^ "Ground Ignition Weights". history.nasa.gov. Retrieved May 31, 2022.
^ a b c d e f Loff, Sarah (April 17, 2015). "Apollo 11 Mission Overview". NASA. Archived from the original on February 9, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2018.
^ a b c d e "Apollo 11 Mission Summary". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2019.
^ a b c d e f Orloff 2000, p. 106.
^ a b c d e f Orloff 2000, p. 109.
^ a b c d e Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995). "The First Lunar Landing". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Archived from the original on December 27, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Orloff 2000, p. 97.
^ Williams, David R. (December 11, 2003). "Apollo Landing Site Coordinates". NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive. NASA. Archived from the original on December 25, 2018. Retrieved October 18, 2021.
^ a b c d Orloff 2000, p. 107.
^ Jones, Eric (April 8, 2018). "One Small Step". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2019.
^ a b c d e f g Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995). "One Small Step". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Archived from the original on August 8, 2019. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Stenger, Richard (May 25, 2001). "Man on the Moon: Kennedy speech ignited the dream". CNN. Archived from the original on June 6, 2010. Retrieved December 30, 2018.
^ Logsdon 1976, p. 134.
^ Logsdon 1976, pp. 13 15.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, p. 1.
^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966, pp. 101 106.
^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966, p. 134.
^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966, pp. 332 333.
^ Logsdon 1976, p. 121.
^ Logsdon 1976, pp. 112 117.
^ "Excerpt: 'Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs'". NASA. May 25, 1961. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2018.
^ Keilen, Eugene (September 19, 1962). "'Visiting Professor' Kennedy Pushes Space Age Spending" (PDF). The Rice Thresher. p. 1. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2018.
^ Boyd, Jade (August 30, 2012). "JFK's 1962 Moon Speech Still Appeals 50 Years Later". Rice University. Archived from the original on February 2, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018.
^ "John F. Kennedy Moon Speech Rice Stadium". NASA. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2018.
^ Fishman, Charles. "What You Didn't Know About the Apollo 11 Mission". Smithsonian. Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved June 17, 2019.
^ Madrigal, Alexis C. (September 12, 2012). "Moondoggle: The Forgotten Opposition to the Apollo Program". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved June 17, 2019.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, p. 15.
^ Logsdon 2011, p. 32.
^ "Address at 18th U.N. General Assembly". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. September 20, 1963. Archived from the original on March 11, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2018.
^ Glass, Andrew (September 20, 2017). "JFK Proposes Joint Lunar Expedition with Soviets, September 20, 1963". Politico. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2018.
^ "The Rendezvous That Was Almost Missed: Lunar Orbit Rendezvous and the Apollo Program". NASA Langley Research Center Office of Public Affairs. NASA. December 1992. Archived from the original on December 23, 2020. Retrieved December 26, 2018.
^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966, pp. 85 86.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 72 77.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 48 49.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 181 182, 205 208.
^ Butler, P. M. (August 29, 1989). Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (PDF). NASA. pp. 1, 11, 134. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019.
^ White, H. D.; Lokerson, D. C. (1971). "The Evolution of IMP Spacecraft Mosfet Data Systems". IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science. 18 (1): 233 236. Bibcode:1971ITNS...18..233W. doi:10.1109/TNS.1971.4325871. ISSN 0018-9499.
^ "Apollo Guidance Computer and the First Silicon Chips". National Air and Space Museum. Smithsonian Institution. October 14, 2015. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2019.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 214 218.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 265 272.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 274 284.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 292 300.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, pp. 303 312.
^ Lindroos, Marcus. "The Soviet Manned Lunar Program" (PDF). MIT OpenCourseWare. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved October 4, 2011.
^ Brown, Jonathan (July 3, 2009). "Recording tracks Russia's Moon gatecrash attempt". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on September 10, 2011. Retrieved January 10, 2011.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, p. 374.
^ Hansen 2005, pp. 312 313.
^ Collins 2001, pp. 288 289.
^ Cunningham 2010, p. 109.
^ a b c Orloff 2000, p. 90.
^ Orloff 2000, p. 72.
^ Hansen 2005, pp. 338 339.
^ Collins 2001, pp. 434 435.
^ a b Hansen 2005, p. 359.
^ a b Slayton & Cassutt 1994, p. 237.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, p. 261.
^ a b Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, p. 375.
^ Kranz 2000, p. 27.
^ Orloff 2000, p. 272.
^ Kranz 2000, pp. 230, 236, 273, 320.
^ Glen E. Swanson, ed. (August 5, 2004). SP-4223: Before This Decade is Out Personal Reflections on the Apollo Program Chapter 9 Glynn S. Lunney. NASA. p. 211. ISBN 978-0-16-050139-5. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2019. Apollo 11 flight directors pose for a group photo in the Mission Control Center. Pictured left to right, and the shifts that they served during the mission, are (in front and sitting) Clifford E. Charlesworth (Shift 1), Gerald D. Griffin (Shift 1), Eugene F. Kranz (Shift 2), Milton L. Windler (Shift 4), and Glynn S. Lunney (Shift 3). (NASA Photo S-69-39192.)
^ Murray, Charles A.; Cox, Catherine Bly (July 1989). Apollo, the race to the moon. Simon & Schuster. pp. 356, 403, 437. ISBN 978-0-671-61101-9. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2019.
^ Woods, David; MacTaggart, Ken; O'Brien, Frank (May 18, 2019). "Day 4, part 4: Checking Out Eagle". Apollo Flight Journal. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2019   via NASA.
^ Woods, David; MacTaggart, Ken; O'Brien, Frank (May 18, 2019). "Day 3, part 1: Viewing Africa and Breakfast". Apollo Flight Journal. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2019   via NASA.
^ Reichhardt, Tony (June 7, 2019). "Twenty People Who Made Apollo Happen". Air & Space/Smithsonian. Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved September 7, 2019.
^ a b Collins 2001, pp. 332 334.
^ Collins 2001, p. 332.
^ a b Collins 2001, p. 333.
^ "1971 78 Dollar Eisenhower". CoinSite. ROKO Design Group, Inc. 1994. Archived from the original on August 30, 2013. Retrieved July 20, 2009.
^ "Susan B. Anthony Dollar 1979 1999". United States Mint. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014.
^ Marshall Space Flight Center 1969, p. 8.
^ Collins 2001, pp. 334 335.
^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, p. 331.
^ Collins 1994, p. 116.
^ "Kit, Pilot's Personal Preference, Apollo 11". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
^ "Personal Preference Kits (PPKs)". Space flown collectible artifacts. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved December 24, 2018.
^ Hansen 2005, p. 527.
^ Slayton & Cassutt 1994, pp. 191 192.
^ a b c d Garcia, Mark (February 8, 2018). "50 Years Ago: Lunar Landing Sites Selected". NASA. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2018.
^ Cortright 1975, p. 79.
^ Harland 1999, p. 19.
^ Cortright 1975, pp. 98 99.
^ Collins 1994, p. 7.
^ Cappellari 1972, p. 976.
^ "Apollo 10". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on February 6, 2021. Retrieved December 26, 2018.
^ a b Chaikin 1994, p. 148.
^ Hansen 2005, p. 360.
^ Collins 2001, p. 347.
^ Aldrin & Abraham 2016, pp. 57 58.
^ Hansen 2005, pp. 363 365.
^ Chaikin 1994, p. 149.
^ Chaikin 1994, p. 150.
^ Schefter 1999, p. 281.
^ Hansen 2005, pp. 371 372.
^ Benson & Faherty 1978, p. 472.
^ "Scientific Experiments". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2018.
^ a b c d Benson & Faherty 1978, p. 474.
^ a b c Benson & Faherty 1978, p. 475.
^ Benson & Faherty 1978, pp. 355 356.
^ Collins 2001, pp. 355 357.
^ a b Woods, W. David; MacTaggart, Kenneth D.; O'Brien, Frank (June 6, 2019). "Day 1, Part 1: Launch". Apollo Flight Journal. Archived from the original on December 5, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2018   via NASA.
^ a b Bilstein 1980, pp. 369 370.
^ a b Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979, p. 338.
^ "President Richard Nixon's Daily Diary" (PDF). Richard Nixon Presidential Library. July 16, 1969. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 4, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
^ Collins 2001, pp. 374 375.
^ Marshall Space Flight Center 1969, p. 7.
^ Woods, W. David; MacTaggart, Kenneth D.; O'Brien, Frank (February 10, 2017). "Day 4, part 1: Entering Lunar Orbit". Apollo Flight Journal. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2019   via NASA.
^ "Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Mission" (PDF) (Press kit). Washington, D.C.: NASA. July 6, 1969. Release No: 69-83K. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 11, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, p. 130.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, p. 9.
^ a b Collins & Aldrin 1975, p. 209.
^ Mindell 2008, pp. 220 221.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, p. 82.
^ Collins & Aldrin 1975, pp. 210 212.
^ Hamilton & Hackler 2008, pp. 34 43.
^ Hamilton, Margaret H. (March 1, 1971). "Computer Got Loaded". Datamation (Letter). p. 13. ISSN 0011-6963.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, pp. 190 192.
^ Martin, Fred H. (July 1994). "Apollo 11: 25 Years Later". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Eyles, Don (February 6, 2004). "Tales from the Lunar Module Guidance Computer". 27th annual Guidance and Control Conference. Breckenridge, Colorado: American Astronautical Society. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Chaikin 1994, p. 196.
^ Mindell 2008, pp. 195 197.
^ Chaikin 1994, p. 197.
^ Chaikin 1994, pp. 198 199.
^ Chaikin 1994, p. 199.
^ Mindell 2008, p. 226.
^ Orloff 2000, p. 295.
^ Fjeld, Paul (June 2013). "The Biggest Myth about the First Moon Landing" (PDF). Horizons. 38 (6): 5 6. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2019.
^ Failure is Not an Option (TV production). The History Channel. August 24, 2003. OCLC 54435670.
^ "James May speaks to Charles Duke". BBC Archives. 2009. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved June 7, 2009.
^ Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995). "Post-landing Activities". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Chaikin 1994, pp. 204, 623.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, pp. 21 22.
^ a b c d Jones, Eric M.; Glover, Ken, eds. (1995). "First Steps". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Archived from the original on October 9, 2006. Retrieved September 23, 2006.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, p. 22.
^ Cortright 1975, p. 215.
^ Johnston, Dietlein & Berry 1975, pp. 115 120.
^ Duggan, Paul (August 25, 2012). "Neil Armstrong, first man to step on the Moon, dies at 82". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2013.
^ a b Macey, Richard (August 5, 2006). "One giant blunder for mankind: how NASA lost Moon pictures". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. Archived from the original on May 29, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ a b Sarkissian 2001, p. 287.
^ Stern, Jacob (July 23, 2019). "One Small Controversy About Neil Armstrong's Giant Leap When, exactly, did the astronaut set foot on the moon? No one knows". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2019.
^ a b c Orloff 2000, p. 108.
^ Canright, Shelley, ed. (July 15, 2004). "Apollo Moon Landing 35th Anniversary". NASA Education. NASA. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013. Includes the "a" article as intended.
^ Mikkelson, Barbara & David P.  "One Small Step" at Snopes.com: Urban Legends Reference Pages.
^ "Armstrong 'got Moon quote right'". BBC News. London. October 2, 2006. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Ghosh, Pallab (June 3, 2009). "Armstrong's 'poetic' slip on Moon". BBC News. London. Archived from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Meyer, Charles (2009). "Lunar Sample Compendium: Contingency Soil (10010)" (PDF). Astromaterials Research & Exploration Science. NASA. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ a b Mission Evaluation Team 1969, p. 23.
^ a b "A Flag on the Moon". The Attic. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
^ "Exhibit: Apollo 11 and Nixon". American Originals. Washington, D.C.: National Archives and Records Administration. March 1996. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
^ Borman & Serling 1988, pp. 237 238.
^ "Richard Nixon: Telephone Conversation With the Apollo 11 Astronauts on the Moon". The American Presidency Project. UC Santa Barbara. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2018.
^ "Apollo 11 Astronauts Talk With Richard Nixon From the Surface of the Moon - AT&T Archives". AT&T Tech Channel. July 20, 2012. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2020   via YouTube.
^ a b Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995). "EASEP Deployment and Closeout". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Archived from the original on February 25, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Harland 1999, pp. 28 29.
^ "Lunar Sample Overview". Lunar and Planetary Institute. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2018.
^ University of Western Australia (January 17, 2012). "Moon-walk mineral discovered in Western Australia". ScienceDaily. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved September 24, 2018.
^ Gardner 2017, p. 143.
^ "Neil Armstrong Explains His Famous Apollo 11 Moonwalk". Space.com. New York: TechMediaNetwork, Inc. December 10, 2010. Archived from the original on August 2, 2013. Retrieved May 25, 2013.
^ a b Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995). "Trying to Rest". Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ "White House 'Lost In Space' Scenarios". The Smoking Gun. New York. August 8, 2005. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2013. Scanned copy of the "In Event of Moon Disaster" memo.
^ Mann, Jim (July 7, 1999). "The Story of a Tragedy That Was Not to Be". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 30, 2013. Retrieved May 25, 2013.
^ a b Safire, William (July 12, 1999). "Essay; Disaster Never Came". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2013.
^ Thomas, Ashley (July 23, 2019). "How a Felt-Tipped Marker Saved the Moon Landing". Retrieved July 20, 2022.
^ "The untold story: how one small silicon disc delivered a giant message to the Moon". collectSPACE. November 15, 2007. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2019.
^ "Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages" (PDF) (Press release). Washington, D.C.: NASA. July 13, 1969. Release No: 69-83F. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ Collins & Aldrin 1975, p. 219.
^ "American flags still standing on the Moon, say scientists". The Daily Telegraph. June 30, 2012. Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved September 24, 2018.
^ a b c Collins 2001, p. 402.
^ Collins 2001, pp. 401 407.
^ Collins 2001, pp. 406 408, 410.
^ Williams, David R. "Apollo Tables". NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive. NASA. Archived from the original on October 1, 2006. Retrieved September 23, 2006.
^ Meador, James (2021). "Long-term Orbit Stability of the Apollo 11 "Eagle"Lunar Module Ascent Stage". arXiv:2105.10088 [physics.space-ph].
^ a b c Collins & Aldrin 1975, p. 222.
^ Psalm 8:3 4
^ Rodriguez, Rachel (July 20, 2009). "The 10-year-old who helped Apollo 11, 40 years later". CNN. Archived from the original on January 26, 2010. Retrieved January 10, 2011.
^ Carmichael 2010, p. 3.
^ Carmichael 2010, p. 21.
^ Carmichael 2010, pp. 38 43, 71 72.
^ Carmichael 2010, p. 85.
^ "Press Kit Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Mission" (PDF). NASA. July 6, 1969. p. 57. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
^ Carmichael 2010, pp. 107 108, 145 146.
^ Richelson, Jeffrey T. (October 2013). "Weather or Not". Air Force Magazine. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019.
^ a b c Woods, W. David; MacTaggart, Kenneth D.; O'Brien, Frank. "Day 9: Re-entry and Splashdown". Apollo Flight Journal. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2018   via NASA.
^ Carmichael 2010, pp. 136 137, 144 145.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, p. 28.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, pp. 169 170.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, p. 170.
^ US Department of Commerce, NOAA. "SMG Weather History Apollo Program". www.weather.gov. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2019.
^ "'They would get killed': The weather forecast that saved Apollo 11". Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2019.
^ a b Mission Evaluation Team 1969, pp. 164 167.
^ Carmichael 2010, pp. 184 185.
^ Carmichael 2010, pp. 186 188.
^ Carmichael 2010, pp. 199 200.
^ Johnston, Dietlein & Berry 1975, pp. 406 424.
^ "The Lunar Quarantine Program". SP-368. Archived from the original on July 14, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2019.
^ "Remarks to Apollo 11 Astronauts Aboard the U.S.S. Hornet Following Completion of Their Lunar Mission". The American Presidency Project. UC Santa Barbara. July 24, 1969. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2018.
^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969, pp. 166, 171 173.
^ Extra-Terrestrial Exposure, 34 Federal Register 11975 (July 16, 1969), codified at Federal Aviation Regulation pt. 1200 Archived May 22, 2021, at the Wayback Machine
^ "A Front Row Seat For History". NASAexplores. NASA. July 15, 2004. Archived from the original on March 19, 2006. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ Carmichael 2010, p. 118.
^ Ertel, Newkirk & Brooks 1978, p. 312.
^ a b "Richard Nixon: Remarks at a Dinner in Los Angeles Honoring the Apollo 11 Astronauts". The American Presidency Project. August 13, 1969. Archived from the original on May 14, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2017.
^ "President Offers Toast to 'Three Brave Men'". The Evening Sun. Baltimore, Maryland. Associated Press. August 14, 1969. p. 1. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019   via Newspapers.com.
^ Smith, Merriman (August 14, 1969). "Astronauts Awed by the Acclaim". The Honolulu Advertiser. Honolulu, Hawaii. UPI. p. 1. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019   via Newspapers.com.
^ "The Apollo 11 Crew Members Appear Before a Joint Meeting of Congress". United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original on March 4, 2018. Retrieved March 3, 2018.
^ "Jean P. Haydon Museum". Fodor's Travel. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2018.
^ a b "Apollo 11 Crew Starts World Tour". Logan Daily News. Logan, Ohio. Associated Press. September 29, 1969. p. 1. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019   via Newspapers.com.
^ "Japan's Sato Gives Medals to Apollo Crew". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles, California. November 5, 1969. p. 20. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019   via Newspapers.com.
^ "Australia Welcomes Apollo 11 Heroes". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney, New South Wales. November 1, 1969. p. 1. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019   via Newspapers.com.
^ "Lunar Missions: Apollo 11". Lunar Hall of Fame. 2008. Archived from the original on October 24, 2008. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
^ a b c Launius, Roger D. "Project Apollo: A Retrospective Analysis". Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2019.
^ a b c Chaikin 2007, p. 57.
^ Schefter 1999, p. 288.
^ Beard, David; Kirkpatrick, Nick (July 17, 2014). "We Put a Man on the Moon, So Why Can't We ...?". Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2018.
^ Schefter 1999, p. 283.
^ a b c Niiler, Eric (July 11, 2019). "Why Civil Rights Activists Protested the Moon Landing". HISTORY. Retrieved November 10, 2021.
^ Madrigal, Alexis C. (May 28, 2011). "Gil Scott-Heron's Poem, 'Whitey on the Moon'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2019.
^ a b Chiroux, Matthis (March 11, 2012). "Whitey on the Moon, Again?". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved January 3, 2019.
^ Chaikin 2007, p. 58.
^ Compton, William David (1989). "Where No Man Has Gone Before: A History of Apollo Lunar Exploration Missions". NASA Special Publication. 494: 420. Bibcode:1989NASSP.494..420C. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019.
^ "Apollo 11". History. August 23, 2018. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 3, 2019.
^ McCurdy 1997, pp. 106 107.
^ Chaikin 1994, p. 631.
^ Wilford, John Noble (December 18, 1989). "Russians Finally Admit They Lost Race to Moon". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved January 8, 2019.
^ Das, Saswato R. (July 16, 2009). "The Moon Landing through Soviet Eyes: A Q&A with Sergei Khrushchev, son of former premier Nikita Khrushchev". Scientific American. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2019.
^ Needell, Allan (February 25, 2017). "The Last Time the Command Module Columbia Toured". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 9, 2018.
^ a b "Apollo 11 Command Module Columbia". Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2017.
^ "Museum in DC". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. May 3, 2016. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2018.
^ Maksel, Rebecca (February 22, 2017). "Apollo 11 Moonship To Go On Tour". Air and Space Magazine. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved August 27, 2017.
^ "Neil Armstrong's sons help open exhibit of father's spacecraft in Ohio". collectSPACE. September 30, 2019. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2019.
^ "Apollo to the Moon". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. March 20, 2003. Archived from the original on September 25, 2018. Retrieved September 25, 2018.
^ "'Apollo to the Moon' no more: Air and Space Museum closes gallery". collectSPACE. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2018.
^ "Neil Armstrong's Apollo 11 spacesuit unveiled at Smithsonian". Reuters. July 16, 2019. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2019.
^ "Mobile Quarantine Facility". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. March 20, 2016. Archived from the original on August 10, 2018. Retrieved September 30, 2018.
^ "Apollo 11 Flotation Collar". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. March 20, 2016. Archived from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved September 30, 2018.
^ "National Air and Space Museum Moves Apollo Artifact to Future Home". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. September 15, 2015. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2018.
^ "LRO Sees Apollo Landing Sites". NASA. July 17, 2009. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2018.
^ "Location of Apollo Lunar Modules". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved September 24, 2018.
^ "Amazon boss Jeff Bezos 'finds Apollo 11 Moon engines'". BBC News. London. March 28, 2012. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ Kolawole, Emi (July 19, 2013). "Bezos Expeditions retrieves and identifies Apollo 11 engine #5, NASA confirms identity". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2017.
^ "Apollo 11 engine find confirmed". Albuquerque Journal. Albuquerque, New Mexico. July 21, 2013. p. 5. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved December 23, 2018   via Newspapers.com.
^ "Apollo 11 SIVB NSSDCA/COSPAR ID: 1969-059B". NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive. NASA. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2018.
^ "Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility". NASA. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2018.
^ Flavin, Kristen (September 10, 2016). "The mystery of the missing Moon rocks". World. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2018.
^ Pearlman, Robert. "Where today are the Apollo 11 goodwill lunar sample displays?". collectSPACE. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2012.
^ Earth magazine, March 2011, pp. 42 51
^ Bates, Lauderdale & Kernaghan 1979, pp. 2-3 & 4-32.
^ Todaro, Chelsea (March 5, 2018). "Report: Humans have left 500,000 pounds of 'trash' on the Moon". Palm Beach Post. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2018.
^ "An Audience with Neil Armstrong (2011 interview)". Slartibartfast. May 2011. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2019   via YouTube.
^ Allen, Nick (February 9, 2015). "Neil Armstrong's widow discovers moon camera in cupboard". Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2019.
^ Jones, Eric; Lotzmann, Ulli; Glover, Ken; Needell, Allan (January 6, 2016). "Lunar Surface Flown Apollo 11 Artifacts From the Neil Armstrong Estate". Apollo Lunar Surface Journal. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2019.
^ "The Armstrong Purse: Flown Apollo 11 Lunar Artifacts". National Air and Space Museum. February 6, 2015. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved July 19, 2019.
^ "Up Close With Apollo 11". Life. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ "Apollo 11 Onboard Audio". Apollo 40th Anniversary. NASA. July 26, 2013. Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ Garner, Robert, ed. (March 16, 2015). "Apollo 11 Partial Restoration HD Videos (Downloads)". NASA. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ Riley, Christopher (July 20, 2010). "Sound restored to mission control film shot during Apollo 11 Moon landing". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2013.
^ "We Choose the Moon". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on June 17, 2009. Retrieved July 19, 2009.
^ "Apollo 11 Crew Meets With President Obama". Image of the Day Gallery. NASA. July 20, 2009. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
^ Zeleny, Jeff (July 21, 2009). "Obama Hails Apollo Crew From a Lens of Childhood". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2017.
^ "Text of S.951 as Engrossed in Senate: New Frontier Congressional Gold Medal Act U.S. Congress OpenCongress". OpenCongress.org. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ "Text of H.R.2245 as Enrolled Bill: New Frontier Congressional Gold Medal Act U.S. Congress OpenCongress". OpenCongress.org. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ "Moon landings: British scientists salute space heroes". The Daily Telegraph. London. July 17, 2009. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
^ Pub. L. 114 282: Apollo 11 50th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Act (text) (PDF)
^ "Apollo 11 50th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Program". United States Mint. October 11, 2018. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2019.
^ Kenny, Glenn (February 27, 2019). "'Apollo 11' Review: The 1969 Moon Mission Still Has the Power to Thrill". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2019.
^ Rubin, Rebecca (February 13, 2019). "'Apollo 11' Documentary Gets Exclusive Imax Release". Variety. Archived from the original on December 19, 2020. Retrieved September 6, 2019.
^ "Apollo 50 Festival". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
^ "Apollo 50 Go For the Moon". Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
^ "50th Anniversary of the Moon Landing". Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2019.
^ Bartels, Meghan (July 19, 2019). "Google (and Apollo 11's Michael Collins) Celebrate Moon Landing's 50th with EPIC Google Doodle". Space.com. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved September 7, 2019.
^ Dunn, Marcia (July 19, 2019). "Apollo 11 astronauts reunite on 50th anniversary of moonshot". ABC. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
^ Haynes, Danielle (July 19, 2019). "Trump, Apollo 11 astronauts discuss merits of going to moon before Mars". UPI. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved September 7, 2019.
^ "Moon Landing Film Coming to Theaters". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. September 1, 1969. p. 69. Archived from the original on September 5, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2019   via Newspapers.com.
^ Jones, Sam (May 25, 2009). "The moon shoot: film of Apollo mission on show again after 35 years in the can". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2019.
^ "Space Specials at a Glance". Florida Today. Cocoa, Florida. July 17, 1994. p. 115. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2019   via Newspapers.com.
^ Kenny, Glenn (February 27, 2019). "'Apollo 11' Review: The 1969 Moon Mission Still Has the Power to Thrill". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2019.
^ Rubin, Rebecca (February 13, 2019). "'Apollo 11' Documentary Gets Exclusive Imax Release". Variety. Archived from the original on December 19, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2019.
^ Foust, Jeff (July 9, 2019). "Review: Chasing the Moon". Space News. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2019.
^ Howell, Elizabeth (July 17, 2019). "'8 Days: To the Moon and Back' Shows Apollo 11 Milestones". Space.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2019.
^ Orloff 2000, p. iv.
Sources
Aldrin, Buzz; Abraham, Ken (2016). No Dream is Too High: Life Lessons from a Man who Walked on the Moon. Washington D.C.: National Geographic. ISBN 978-1-4262-1649-7. OCLC 1023166907.
Bates, James R.; Lauderdale, W. W.; Kernaghan, Harold (April 1979). ALSEP Termination Report (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: NASA. RP-1036. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2018.
Benson, Charles D.; Faherty, William B. (1978). Moonport: A History of Apollo Launch Facilities and Operations (PDF). Washington, D.C.: NASA. SP-4204. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2018.
Bilstein, Roger E. (1980). Stages to Saturn: A Technological History of the Apollo/Saturn Launch Vehicle (PDF). NASA History Series. NASA. ISBN 9780160489099. SP-4206. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
Borman, Frank; Serling, Robert J. (1988). Countdown: An Autobiography. New York: Silver Arrow. ISBN 978-0-688-07929-1. OCLC 937625026.
Brooks, Courtney G.; Grimwood, James M.; Swenson, Loyd S. Jr. (1979). Chariots for Apollo: A History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft. NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.: Scientific and Technical Information Branch, NASA. ISBN 978-0-486-46756-6. LCCN 79001042. OCLC 4664449. SP-4205. Archived from the original on July 14, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2010.
Cappellari, J.O. Jr. (May June 1972). "Where on the Moon? An Apollo Systems Engineering Problem". Bell System Technical Journal. 51 (5): 955 1126. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1972.tb02642.x. ISSN 0005-8580. OCLC 17779623.
Carmichael, Scott W. (2010). Moon Men Return: USS Hornet and the Recovery of the Apollo 11 Astronauts. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-110-5. OCLC 562772897.
Chaikin, Andrew (1994). A Man on the Moon: The Triumphant Story Of The Apollo Space Program. New York: Penguin Group. ISBN 978-0-14-027201-7. OCLC 890357362.
Chaikin, Andrew (2007). "Live from the Moon: The Societal Impact of Apollo".  In Dick, Steven J.; Launius, Roger D. (eds.). Societal Impact of Spaceflight (PDF). Washington, D.C.: NASA. OCLC 175218028. SP-4801. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved January 4, 2019.
Collins, Michael; Aldrin, Edwin E. Jr. (1975). "The Eagle Has landed".  In Cortright, Edgar M (ed.). Apollo Expeditions to the Moon. Washington, D.C.: NASA. pp. 203 224. OCLC 1623434. SP-350. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
Collins, Michael (2001) [1974]. Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut's Journeys. New York: Cooper Square Press. ISBN 978-0-8154-1028-7. LCCN 2001017080. OCLC 45755963.
Collins, Michael (1994) [1976]. Flying to the Moon: An Astronauts Story. New York: Square Fish. ISBN 978-0-374-42356-8. OCLC 29388756.
Cortright, Edgar M (1975). "Scouting the Moon".  In Cortright, Edgar M (ed.). Apollo Expeditions to the Moon. Washington, D.C.: NASA. pp. 79 102. OCLC 1623434. SP-350. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
Cunningham, Walter (2010) [1977]. The All-American Boys. ipicturebooks. ISBN 978-1-876963-24-8. OCLC 713908039.
Ertel, Ivan D.; Newkirk, Roland W.; Brooks, Courtney G. (1978). The Apollo Spacecraft A Chronology. Vol. IV. Part 3 (1969 3rd quarter). Washington, D.C.: NASA. SP-4009. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2017.
Gardner, William (2017). Before the Fall: An Inside View of the Pre-Watergate White House. London; New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-31458-9.
Hamilton, Margaret H.; Hackler, William R. (December 2008). "Universal Systems Language: Lessons Learned from Apollo". Computer. 41 (12): 34 43. doi:10.1109/MC.2008.541. ISSN 0018-9162. S2CID 15870726.
Hansen, James R. (2005). First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-5631-5. LCCN 2005049992. OCLC 937302502.
Harland, David (1999). Exploring the Moon: The Apollo Expeditions. London; New York: Springer. ISBN 978-1-85233-099-6. OCLC 982158259.
Johnston, Richard S.; Dietlein, Lawrence F.; Berry, Charles A., eds. (1975). Biomedical Results of Apollo (PDF). Vol. NASA-SP-368. Washington, D.C.: NASA. SP-368. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019.
Kranz, Gene (2000). Failure Is Not An Option. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-0079-0. OCLC 829406416.
Logsdon, John M. (1976). The Decision to Go to the Moon: Project Apollo and the National Interest. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. OCLC 849992795.
Logsdon, John M. (2011). John F. Kennedy and the Race to the Moon. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-11010-6. OCLC 707157323.
Mission Evaluation Team (November 1969). Apollo 11 Mission Report (PDF). Houston, Texas: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. OCLC 10970862. SP-238. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 4, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2013.
Marshall Space Flight Center (June 1969). Technical Information Summary, Apollo-11 (AS-506) Apollo Saturn V Space Vehicle (PDF). Huntsville, Alabama: NASA. Document ID: 19700011707; Accession Number: 70N21012; Report Number: NASA-TM-X-62812; S&E-ASTR-S-101-69. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 29, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2013.
McCurdy, Howard E. (1997). Space and the American Imagination. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. ISBN 978-1-56098-764-2. OCLC 36186250.
Mindell, David A. (2008). Digital Apollo: Human and Machine in Spaceflight. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-13497-2. LCCN 2007032255. OCLC 751829782.
Orloff, Richard W. (2000). Apollo by the Numbers: A Statistical Reference. NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.: NASA History Division, Office of Policy and Plans. ISBN 978-0-16-050631-4. LCCN 00061677. OCLC 829406439. SP-2000-4029. Archived from the original on August 23, 2007. Retrieved June 12, 2013.
Sarkissian, John M. (2001). "On Eagle's Wings: The Parkes Observatory's Support of the Apollo 11 Mission". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia. 18 (3): 287 310. Bibcode:2001PASA...18..287S. doi:10.1071/AS01038. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2013.
Schefter, James (July 1999). The Race: The Uncensored Story of How America Beat Russia to the Moon. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-49253-9.
Slayton, Donald K. "Deke"; Cassutt, Michael (1994). Deke! U.S. Manned Space: From Mercury to the Shuttle. New York: Forge. ISBN 978-0-312-85503-1. LCCN 94002463. OCLC 29845663.
Swenson, Loyd S. Jr.; Grimwood, James M.; Alexander, Charles C. (1966). This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury. The NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.: National Aeronautics and Space Administration. OCLC 569889. SP-4201. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010. Retrieved June 28, 2007.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Apollo 11.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Apollo 11.
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
In Event of Moon Disaster
Listen to this article (1 hour and 29 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 13 July 2020 (2020-07-13), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
"Apollo 11 transcripts" at Spacelog
Apollo 11 in real time
Apollo 11 Press Conference filmed by KPRC-TV at Texas Archive of the Moving Image
Multimedia
Garner, Robert (ed.). "Apollo 11 Partial Restoration HD Videos (Downloads)". NASA. Retrieved June 13, 2013. Remastered videos of the original landing.
Dynamic timeline of lunar excursion. Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera
The short film Moonwalk One  is available for free download at the Internet Archive.
The short film The Eagle Has Landed: The Flight of Apollo 11  is available for free download at the Internet Archive.
Apollo 11 Restored EVA Part 1 (1h of restored footage)
Apollo 11: As They Photographed It (Augmented Reality) The New York Times, Interactive, July 18, 2019
"Coverage of the Flight of Apollo 11" provided by Todd Kosovich for RadioTapes.com. Radio station recordings (airchecks) covering the flight of Apollo 11.
vteApollo program
List of missions
canceled missions
List of Apollo astronauts
Launch complexes
Launch Complex 34
Launch Complex 37
Launch Complex 39
A
B
Ground facilities
Mission Control Center
Cape Kennedy Air Force Station
Crawler-transporter
Kennedy Space Center
Manned Space Flight Network
Launch vehicles
Little Joe II
Saturn
Saturn I
Saturn IB
Saturn V
Spacecraft and rover
Apollo spacecraft
Command and Service Module
Lunar Module
Lunar Roving Vehicle
FlightsUncrewed
AS-101
AS-102
AS-201
AS-202
Apollo 4
Apollo 5
Apollo 6 
Crewed
Apollo 1 
Apollo 7
Apollo 8
Apollo 9
Apollo 10
Apollo 11
Apollo 12
Apollo 13 
Apollo 14
Apollo 15
Apollo 16
Apollo 17
Saturndevelopment
Saturn-Apollo 1
SA-2
SA-3
SA-4
SA-5
AS-203
Apollo 4
Apollo 6 
Abort tests
QTV
Pad Abort Test-1
A-001
A-002
A-003
Pad Abort Test-2
A-004
Pegasus flights
AS-103
AS-104
AS-105
Apollo 8 specific
Earthrise
Genesis reading
Apollo 11 specific
Command Module Columbia
Lunar Module Eagle
Tranquility Base
Goodwill messages
Lunar sample displays
Missing tapes
Anniversaries
50th Anniversary commemorative coins
In popular culture
Apollo 12 specific
Statio Cognitum
Surveyor 3
Surveyor crater
Bench Crater meteorite
J002E3
Moon Museum
Reports of Streptococcus mitis on the Moon
Apollo 13 specific
"Houston, we've had a problem"
Apollo 14 specific
Modular Equipment Transporter
Fra Mauro formation
Big Bertha
Moon tree
Apollo 15 specific
Journey
Lunar operations
Solo operations
Return to Earth
Hadley Apennine
Fallen Astronaut
Genesis Rock
Great Scott
Hadley Rille meteorite
Seatbelt basalt
Postal covers incident
Apollo 16 specific
Big Muley
Apollo 17 specific
The Blue Marble
Taurus Littrow
Tracy's Rock
Nansen-Apollo crater
Shorty crater
Lunar sample display
Lunar basalt 70017
Troctolite 76535
Apollo Lunar Sounder Experiment
Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum, and Phooey
Post-Apollocapsule use
Skylab
2
3
4
Apollo Soyuz
Symbol   indicates failure or partial failure
vteSpacecraft missions to the MoonExplorationprograms
American
Apollo
Artemis
CLPS
Lunar Orbiter
Lunar Precursor
Pioneer
Ranger
Surveyor
Chinese (Chang'e)
Indian (Chandrayaan)
Japanese
Korean
Russian
Luna-Glob
Soviet
Crewed
Luna
Lunokhod
Zond
ActivemissionsOrbiters
ARTEMIS
Artemis 1
ArgoMoon
EQUULEUS
LunaH-Map
Lunar IceCube
NEA Scout
OMOTENASHI
LunIR
CAPSTONE
Chandrayaan-2 Orbiter
Chang'e 5-T1 (service module)
Danuri
Hakuto-R M1
Emirates Lunar Mission
Lunar Flashlight
Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter
Queqiao (relay satellite at L2)
Landers
Chang'e 3
Chang'e 4
Rovers
Yutu-2
PastmissionsCrewed landings
Apollo 11
12
14
15
16
17
(List of Apollo astronauts)
Orbiters
Apollo 8
10
Apollo Lunar Module
Chang'e 1
2
5
Chandrayaan-1
Clementine
Explorer 35
49
GRAIL
Hiten
LADEE
Longjiang-2
Luna 10
11
12
14
19
22
Lunar Orbiter 1
2
3
4
5
Lunar Prospector
PFS-1
PFS-2
SMART-1
SELENE (Kaguya, Okina, Ouna)
Impactors
LCROSS
Luna 2
Moon Impact Probe
Ranger 4
6
7
8
9
Landers
Apollo Lunar Module  6
Chang'e 5
Luna 9
13
16
17
20
21
23
24
Surveyor 1
3
5
6
7
Rovers
Lunar Roving Vehicle
Apollo 15
16
17
Lunokhod 1
2
Yutu
Sample return
Apollo 11
12
14
15
16
17
Luna 16
20
24
Chang'e 5
Failed landings
Surveyor 2
4
Luna 5
7
8
15
18
Beresheet
Vikram / Pragyan
Flybys
4M
Apollo 13
AsiaSat-3 / HGS-1
Chang'e 5-T1 / Xiaofei
Geotail
Galileo
ICE
Longjiang-1
Luna 1
3
4
6
Mariner 10
Nozomi
Pioneer 4
Ranger 5
STEREO
TESS
WMAP
Wind
Zond 3
5
6
7
8
PAS-22
PlannedmissionsArtemis
Artemis 2 (2024)
Lunar Gateway
Artemis 3 (2025)
Artemis 4 (2028)
Artemis 5 (2029)
Artemis 6 (2030)
Artemis 7 (2031)
Artemis 8 (2032)
CLPS
Peregrine M1 (May 2023)
Asagumo
CubeRover
Uni
IM-1 (Jun 2023)
IM-2 (2023)
Lunar Trailblazer
VIPER (Nov 2024)
Blue Ghost (2024)
Luna-Glob
Luna 25 (2023)
Luna 26 (2024)
Luna 27 (Aug 2025)
Luna 28 (2027)
Luna 29 (2028)
Luna 30 (2030s)
Luna 31 (2030s)
CLEP
Queqiao2 (2024)
Chang'e 6 (2025)
Chang'e 7 (2026)
Chang'e 8 (2028)
Others
Cislunar Explorers (2023)
CU-E3 (2023)
Chandrayaan-3 (2023)
#dearMoon project (2023)
SLIM (2023)
DESTINY+ (2024)
Hakuto-R M2 (2024)
ispace M3 (2025)
Beresheet 2 (2025)
Lunar Pathfinder (2025)
International Lunar Research Station (mid-late 2020s)
MoonRanger (2020s)
ProposedmissionsRobotic
Lunar Polar Exploration Mission
ALINA
Artemis-7
Blue Moon
BOLAS
Garat a-L
ISOCHRON
LunaNet
Lunar Crater Radio Telescope
McCandless
Moon Diver
Crewed
DSE-Alpha
Boeing Lunar Lander
Lockheed Martin Lunar Lander
Lunar Orbital Station
Cancelled /concepts
Altair
Baden-W rttemberg 1
European Lunar Explorer
First Lunar Outpost
International Lunar Network
LEO
LK
Lunar-A
Lunar Lander
Lunar Mission One
Lunar Observer
Lunokhod 3
MoonLITE
MoonRise
OrbitBeyond
Project Harvest Moon
Prospector
Resource Prospector
SELENE-2
Ukrselena
XL-1
See also
Colonization of the Moon
Google Lunar X Prize
List of lunar probes
List of missions to the Moon
List of artificial objects on the Moon
Lunar resources
Apollo 17 Moon mice
Moon landing conspiracy theories
Apollo 11 anniversaries
List of crewed lunar lander designs
Missions are ordered by launch date. Crewed missions are in italics.
vte  1968   Orbital launches in 1969   1970  Venera 5 | Venera 6 | Kosmos 263 | Soyuz 4 | Soyuz 5 | 7K-L1 No.13L | OSO-5 | OPS 7585 | Kosmos 264 | US-A No.5 | Isis 1 | Meteor-1 No.11 | OPS 3890  OPS 2644 | Intelsat III F-3 | Kosmos 265 | OPS 0757 | Luna E-8 No.201 | 7K-L1S No.3 | Mariner 6 | Kosmos 266 | ESSA-9 | Kosmos 267 | Apollo 9 | OPS 4248 | Kosmos 268 | Kosmos 269 | Kosmos 270 | Kosmos 271 | Kosmos 272 | OV1-17  OV1-18  OV1-19  Orbiscal 2 | OPS 3722  OPS 2285 | Kosmos 273 | Kosmos 274 | Meteor-1 No.12 | 2M No.521 | Mariner 7 | Kosmos 275 | 2M No.522 | Kosmos 276 | Kosmos 277 | Kosmos 278 | Molniya-1 No.16 | OPS 3148 | Nimbus 3  SECOR 13 | Kosmos 279 | OPS 5310 | Kosmos 280 | OPS 1101  OPS 1721 | Kosmos 281 | Apollo 10 | Kosmos 282 | Intelsat III F-4 | OPS 6909  OPS 6911  ERS-29  ERS-26  OV5-9 | Kosmos 283 | Kosmos 284 | Kosmos 285 | OPS 1077 | OGO-6 | Luna E-8-5 No.402 | Kosmos 286 | Explorer 41 | Kosmos 287 | Kosmos 288 | Biosatellite 3 | STV-2 | 7K-L1S No.5 | Kosmos 289 | Luna 15 | Apollo 11 | Kosmos 290 | Molniya-1 No.18 | OPS 1127 | DS-P1-Yu No.23 | OPS 3654 | Intelsat III F-5 | OPS 8285 | Kosmos 291 | Zond 7 | OSO-6  PAC-1 | ATS-5 | Kosmos 292 | Kosmos 293 | Kosmos 294 | Kosmos 295 | OPS 7807 | Pioneer E  ERS-32 | Kosmos 296 | Kosmos 297 | Kosmos 298 | Kosmos 299 | Unnamed | OPS 3531  OPS 4710 | Kosmos 300 | Kosmos 301 | OPS 7613  NRL PL-161  NRL PL-162  NRL PL-163  NRL PL-164  NRL PL-176  Timation 2  Tempsat 2  SOICAL Cone  SOICAL Cylinder | ESRO-1B | Meteor-1 No.15 | Soyuz 6 | Soyuz 7 | Soyuz 8 | Interkosmos 1 | Kosmos 302 | Kosmos 303 | Kosmos 304 | Kosmos 305 | Kosmos 306 | Kosmos 307 | OPS 8455 | Kosmos 308 | Azur | Kosmos 309 | Apollo 12 | Kosmos 310 | Skynet 1A | Kosmos 311 | Kosmos 312 | 7K-L1e No.1 | Kosmos 313 | OPS 6617 | Kosmos 314 | Kosmos 315 | Kosmos 316 | Kosmos 317 | Interkosmos 2 | UnnamedPayloads are separated by bullets (  ), launches by pipes ( | ). Crewed flights are indicated in underline. Uncatalogued launch failures are listed in italics. Payloads deployed from other spacecraft are denoted in brackets.
vteNASAPolicy and historyHistory(creation)
NACA (1915)
National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958)
Space Task Group (1958)
Paine (1986)
Rogers (1986)
Ride (1987)
Space Exploration Initiative (1989)
Augustine (1990)
U.S. National Space Policy (1996)
CFUSAI (2002)
CAIB (2003)
Vision for Space Exploration (2004)
Aldridge (2004)
Augustine (2009)
General
Space Race
Administrator and Deputy Administrator
Chief Scientist
Astronaut Corps
Ranks and positions
Chief
Budget
NASA research
spinoff technologies
NASA TV
NASA Social
Launch Services Program
Mercury Control Center
Manned Space Flight Network
Kennedy Space Center
Vehicle Assembly Building
Launch Complex 39
Launch Complex 48
Launch Control Center
Operations and Checkout Building
Johnson Space Center
Mission Control
Lunar Sample Laboratory
Human spaceflightprogramsPast
X-15 (suborbital)
Mercury
Gemini
Apollo
Skylab
Apollo Soyuz (with the Soviet space program)
Space Shuttle
Shuttle Mir (with Roscosmos State Corporation)
Constellation
Current
International Space Station
Commercial Orbital Transportation Services
Commercial Crew
Orion
Artemis
Lunar Gateway
Robotic programsPast
Hitchhiker
Mariner
Mariner Mark II
MESUR
Mars Surveyor '98
New Millennium
Lunar Orbiter
Pioneer
Planetary Observer
Ranger
Surveyor
Viking
Project Prometheus
Mars Exploration
Mars Exploration Rover
Current
Living With a Star
Lunar Precursor Robotic Program
Earth Observing System
Great Observatories program
Explorers
Voyager
Discovery
New Frontiers
Solar Terrestrial Probes
Commercial Lunar Payload Services
SIMPLEx
Individual featured missions(human and robotic)Past
Apollo 11
COBE
Mercury 3
Mercury-Atlas 6
Magellan
Pioneer 10
Pioneer 11
Galileo
timeline
GALEX
GRAIL
WMAP
Space Shuttle
Spitzer Space Telescope
Sojourner rover
Spirit rover
LADEE
MESSENGER
Aquarius
Cassini
Dawn
Kepler space telescope
Opportunity rover
timeline
observed
RHESSI
Currentlyoperating
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter
2001 Mars Odyssey
New Horizons
International Space Station
Hubble Space Telescope
Swift
THEMIS
Mars Exploration Rover
Curiosity rover
timeline
InSight
GOES 14
Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter
GOES 15
Van Allen Probes
Solar Dynamics Observatory
Juno
Mars Science Laboratory
timeline
NuSTAR
Voyager 1
Voyager 2
WISE
MAVEN
MMS
OSIRIS-REx
Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
Mars 2020
Perseverance rover
Ingenuity helicopter
Ingenuity flights
timeline
James Webb Space Telescope
timeline
Future
Joint Polar Satellite System
NISAR
Europa Clipper
Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
Communicationsand navigation
Near Earth Network
Space Network
Deep Space Network (Goldstone
Madrid
Canberra
Space Flight Operations Facility)
Deep Space Atomic Clock
NASA lists
Astronauts
by name
by year
Gemini astronauts
Apollo astronauts
Space Shuttle crews
NASA aircraft
NASA missions
uncrewed missions
Apollo missions
Space Shuttle missions
United States rockets
NASA cancellations
NASA cameras on spacecraft
NASA imagesand artwork
Earthrise
The Blue Marble
Family Portrait
Pale Blue Dot
Pillars of Creation
Mystic Mountain
Solar System Family Portrait
The Day the Earth Smiled
Fallen Astronaut
Deep fields
Lunar plaques
Pioneer plaques
Voyager Golden Record
Apollo 11 goodwill messages
NASA insignia
Gemini and Apollo medallions
Mission patches
Hubble anniversary images
Related
"We choose to go to the Moon"
Apollo 8 Genesis reading
Apollo 15 postal covers incident
Space Mirror Memorial
The Astronaut Monument
Lunar sample displays
U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame
Space program on U.S. stamps
Apollo 17 Moon mice
Moon tree
Other primates in space
NASA International Space Apps Challenge
Astronauts Day
 Category
 Commons
Portals: Texas Solar System Space Spaceflight Astronomy
Authority control International
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Other
SNAC
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apollo_11&oldid=1149693303"