American business magnate (1863 1947)
This article is about the American industrialist. For other people with the same name, see Henry Ford (disambiguation).
Henry FordPortrait by Fred Hartsook, c. 1919Born(1863-07-30)July 30, 1863Springwells Township, Michigan, U.S.DiedApril 7, 1947(1947-04-07) (aged 83)Dearborn, Michigan, U.S.Resting placeSt. Martha's Episcopal Church Cemetery, Detroit, MichiganOccupationsEngineerindustrialistphilanthropistYears active1891 1945Known forFounding and leading the Ford Motor CompanyPioneering a system that launched the mass production and sale of affordable automotives to the publicTitlePresident of Ford Motor Company (1906 1919, 1943 1945)Political party
Republican (before 1918)
Democratic (after 1918)
SpouseClara Jane Bryant  (m. 1888) ChildrenEdselSignature
Henry Ford (July 30, 1863   April 7, 1947) was an American industrialist and business magnate. He was the founder of Ford Motor Company, and chief developer of the assembly line technique of mass production. Ford created the first automobile that middle-class Americans could afford, and his conversion of the automobile from an expensive luxury into an accessible conveyance profoundly impacted the landscape of the 20th century.
Ford was born on a farm in Michigan's Springwells Township to a Belgian family, leaving home at age 16 to work in Detroit. It was a few years before this time that Ford first experienced automobiles, and throughout the later half of the 1880s, Ford began repairing and later constructing engines, and through the 1890s worked with a division of Edison Electric. He officially founded Ford Motor Company in 1903, after prior failures in business but success in constructing automobiles.
Ford's 1908 introduction of the Model T automobile revolutionized both transportation and American industry. As the Ford Motor Company sole owner, he became one of the richest and best-known people in the world. He is credited with "Fordism", the mass production of inexpensive goods coupled with high wages for workers. Ford was also among the pioneers of the five-day work week. Ford had a global vision, with consumerism as the key to peace. His intense commitment to systematically lowering costs resulted in many technical and business innovations, including a franchise system that put dealerships throughout North America and major cities on six continents.
Ford was widely known for his pacifism during the first years of World War I.  In the 1920s Ford promoted antisemitic content through his newspaper The Dearborn Independent, and the book, The International Jew. After his son Edsel died in 1943, Ford resumed control of the company but was too frail to make decisions and quickly came under the control of subordinates. He turned over the company to his grandson Henry Ford II in 1945. He died in 1947 after leaving most of his wealth to the Ford Foundation, and control of the company to his family.
Early life
Henry Ford was born July 30, 1863, on a farm in Springwells Township, Michigan.[1] His father, William Ford (1826 1905), was born in County Cork, Ireland, to a family that had emigrated from Somerset, England in the 16th century.[2] His mother, Mary Ford (n e Litogot; 1839 1876), was born in Michigan as the youngest child of Belgian immigrants; her parents died when she was a child and she was adopted by neighbors, the O'Herns. Henry Ford's siblings were Margaret Ford (1867 1938); Jane Ford (c. 1868 1945); William Ford (1871 1917) and Robert Ford (1873 1934).  Ford finished eighth grade at a one room school,[3] Springwells Middle School. He never attended high school; he later took a bookkeeping course at a commercial school.[4]
His father gave him a pocket watch when he was 12. At 15, Ford dismantled and reassembled the timepieces of friends and neighbors dozens of times, gaining the reputation of a watch repairman.[5] At twenty, Ford walked four miles to their Episcopal church every Sunday.[6]
Ford was devastated when his mother died in 1876. His father expected him to take over the family farm eventually, but he despised farm work. He later wrote, "I never had any particular love for the farm it was the mother on the farm I loved."[7]
In 1879, Ford left home to work as an apprentice machinist in Detroit, first with James F. Flower & Bros., and later with the Detroit Dry Dock Co. In 1882, he returned to Dearborn to work on the family farm, where he became adept at operating the Westinghouse portable steam engine. He was later hired by Westinghouse to service their steam engines.[8]
Ford stated two significant events occurred in 1875 when he was 12. He received the watch, and he witnessed the operation of a Nichols and Shepard road engine, "...the first vehicle other than horse-drawn that I had ever seen". In his farm workshop, Ford built a "steam wagon or tractor" and a steam car, but thought "steam was not suitable for light vehicles," as "the boiler was dangerous." Ford also said that he "did not see the use of experimenting with electricity, due to the expense of trolley wires, and "no storage battery was in sight of a weight that was practical." In 1885, Ford repaired an Otto engine, and in 1887 he built a four-cycle model with a one-inch bore and a three-inch stroke. In 1890, Ford started work on a two-cylinder engine.
Ford stated, "In 1892, I completed my first motor car, powered by a two-cylinder four horsepower motor, with a two-and-half-inch bore and a six-inch stroke, which was connected to a countershaft by a belt and then to the rear wheel by a chain. The belt was shifted by a clutch lever to control speeds at 10 or 20 miles per hour, augmented by a throttle. Other features included 28-inch wire bicycle wheels with rubber tires, a foot brake, a 3-gallon gasoline tank, and later, a water jacket around the cylinders for cooling. Ford added that "in the spring of 1893 the machine was running to my partial satisfaction and giving an opportunity further to test out the design and material on the road." Between 1895 and 1896, Ford drove that machine about 1000 miles. He then started a second car in 1896, eventually building three of them in his home workshop.[9]
Marriage and family
 Henry Ford in 1888 (aged 25)
Ford married Clara Jane Bryant (1866 1950) on April 11, 1888, and supported himself by farming and running a sawmill.[10] They had one child, Edsel Ford (1893 1943).[11]
Career
In 1891, Ford became an engineer with the Edison Illuminating Company of Detroit. After his promotion to Chief Engineer in 1893, he had enough time and money to devote attention to his experiments on gasoline engines. These experiments culminated in 1896 with the completion of a self-propelled vehicle, which he named the Ford Quadricycle. He test-drove it on June 4. After various test drives, Ford brainstormed ways to improve the Quadricycle.[12]
Also in 1896, Ford attended a meeting of Edison executives, where he was introduced to Thomas Edison. Edison approved of Ford's automobile experimentation. Encouraged by Edison, Ford designed and built a second vehicle, completing it in 1898.[13] Backed by the capital of Detroit lumber baron William H. Murphy, Ford resigned from the Edison Company and founded the Detroit Automobile Company on August 5, 1899.[13] However, the automobiles produced were of a lower quality and higher price than Ford wanted. Ultimately, the company was not successful and was dissolved in January 1901.[13]
With the help of C. Harold Wills, Ford designed, built, and successfully raced a 26-horsepower automobile in October 1901. With this success, Murphy and other stockholders in the Detroit Automobile Company formed the Henry Ford Company on November 30, 1901, with Ford as chief engineer.[13] In 1902, Murphy brought in Henry M. Leland as a consultant; Ford, in response, left the company bearing his name. With Ford gone, Leland renamed the company the Cadillac Automobile Company.[13]
Teaming up with former racing cyclist Tom Cooper, Ford also produced the 80+ horsepower racer "999," which Barney Oldfield was to drive to victory in a race in October 1902. Ford received the backing of an old acquaintance, Alexander Y. Malcomson, a Detroit-area coal dealer.[13] They formed a partnership, "Ford & Malcomson, Ltd." to manufacture automobiles. Ford went to work designing an inexpensive automobile, and the duo leased a factory and contracted with a machine shop owned by John and Horace E. Dodge to supply over $160,000 in parts.[13] Sales were slow, and a crisis arose when the Dodge brothers demanded payment for their first shipment.
Ford Motor Company
 Henry Ford with Thomas Edison and Harvey Firestone. Fort Myers, Florida, February 11, 1929.
In response, Malcomson brought in another group of investors and convinced the Dodge Brothers to accept a portion of the new company.[13] Ford & Malcomson was reincorporated as the Ford Motor Company on June 16, 1903,[13] with $28,000 capital. The original investors included Ford and Malcomson, the Dodge brothers, Malcomson's uncle John S. Gray, Malcolmson's secretary James Couzens, and two of Malcomson's lawyers, John W. Anderson and Horace Rackham. Because of Ford's volatility, Gray was elected president of the company. Ford then demonstrated a newly designed car on the ice of Lake St. Clair, driving 1 mile (1.6 km) in 39.4 seconds and setting a new land speed record at 91.3 miles per hour (146.9 kilometres per hour). Convinced by this success, race driver Barney Oldfield, who named this new Ford model "999" in honor of the fastest locomotive of the day, took the car around the country, making the Ford brand known throughout the United States. Ford also was one of the early backers of the Indianapolis 500.[citation needed]
Model T
The Model T debuted on October 1, 1908. It had the steering wheel on the left, which every other company soon copied. The entire engine and transmission were enclosed; the four cylinders were cast in a solid block; the suspension used two semi-elliptic springs. The car was very simple to drive, and easy and cheap to repair. It was so cheap at $825 in 1908 ($24,880 today), with the price falling every year, that by the 1920s, a majority of American drivers had learned to drive on the Model T,[14][15] despite the fact that drivers who were only familiar with the Model T's unique foot-operated planetary transmission and steering-column operated throttle-cum-accelerator had to learn a completely different set of skills to drive any other gasoline-powered automobile of the time.[citation needed]
 Ford assembly line, 1913
Ford created a huge publicity machine in Detroit to ensure every newspaper carried stories and ads about the new product. Ford's network of local dealers made the car ubiquitous in almost every city in North America. As independent dealers, the franchises grew rich and publicized not just the Ford but also the concept of automobiling; local motor clubs sprang up to help new drivers and encourage them to explore the countryside. Ford was always eager to sell to farmers, who looked at the vehicle as a commercial device to help their business. Sales skyrocketed several years posted 100% gains on the previous year. In 1913, Ford introduced moving assembly belts into his plants, which enabled an enormous increase in production. Although Ford is often credited with the idea, contemporary sources indicate that the concept and development came from employees Clarence Avery, Peter E. Martin, Charles E. Sorensen, and C. Harold Wills.[16] (See Ford Piquette Avenue Plant)
Sales passed 250,000 in 1914. By 1916, as the price dropped to $360 for the basic touring car, sales reached 472,000.[17]
By 1918, half of all cars in the United States were Model Ts. All new cars were black; as Ford wrote in his autobiography, "Any customer can have a car painted any color that he wants so long as it is black."[18] Until the development of the assembly line, which mandated black because of its quicker drying time, Model Ts were available in other colors, including red. The design was fervently promoted and defended by Ford, and production continued as late as 1927; the final total production was 15,007,034. This record stood for the next 45 years, and was achieved in 19 years from the introduction of the first Model T (1908).[19]
Henry Ford turned the presidency of Ford Motor Company over to his son Edsel Ford in December 1918. Henry retained final decision authority and sometimes reversed the decisions of his son. Ford started another company, Henry Ford and Son, and made a show of taking himself and his best employees to the new company; the goal was to scare the remaining holdout stockholders of the Ford Motor Company to sell their stakes to him before they lost most of their value. (He was determined to have full control over strategic decisions.) The ruse worked, and Ford and Edsel purchased all remaining stock from the other investors, thus giving the family sole ownership of the company.[20]
In 1922, Ford also purchased Lincoln Motor Co., founded by Cadillac founder Henry Leland and his son Wilfred during World War I. The Lelands briefly stayed to manage the company, but were soon expelled from it.[21] Despite this acquisition of a premium car maker, Henry displayed relatively little enthusiasm for luxury automobiles in contrast to Edsel, who actively sought to expand Ford into the upscale market.[22] The original Lincoln Model L that the Lelands had introduced in 1920 was also kept in production, untouched for a decade until it became too outdated. It was replaced by the modernized Model K in 1931.[citation needed]
 A 1926 Ford T Roadster on display in India
By the mid-1920s, General Motors was rapidly rising as the leading American automobile manufacturer. GM president Alfred Sloan established the company's "price ladder" whereby GM would offer an automobile for "every purse and purpose" in contrast to Ford's lack of interest in anything outside the low-end market. Although Henry Ford was against replacing the Model T, now 16 years old, Chevrolet was mounting a bold new challenge as GM's entry-level division in the company's price ladder. Ford also resisted the increasingly popular idea of payment plans for cars. With Model T sales starting to slide, Ford was forced to relent and approve work on a successor model, shutting down production for 18 months. During this time, Ford constructed a massive new assembly plant at River Rouge for the new Model A, which launched in 1927.[23]
In addition to its price ladder, GM also quickly established itself at the forefront of automotive styling under Harley Earl's Arts & Color Department, another area of automobile design that Henry Ford did not entirely appreciate or understand. Ford would not have a true equivalent of the GM styling department for many years.[citation needed]
Model A and Ford's later career
By 1926, flagging sales of the Model T finally convinced Ford to make a new model. He pursued the project with a great deal of interest in the design of the engine, chassis, and other mechanical necessities, while leaving the body design to his son. Although Ford fancied himself an engineering genius, he had little formal training in mechanical engineering and could not even read a blueprint. A talented team of engineers performed most of the actual work of designing the Model A (and later the flathead V8) with Ford supervising them closely and giving them overall direction. Edsel also managed to prevail over his father's initial objections in the inclusion of a sliding-shift transmission.[24]
The result was the successful Ford Model A, introduced in December 1927 and produced through 1931, with a total output of more than four million. Subsequently, the Ford company adopted an annual model change system similar to that recently pioneered by its competitor General Motors (and still in use by automakers today). Not until the 1930s did Ford overcome his objection to finance companies, and the Ford-owned Universal Credit Corporation became a major car-financing operation. Henry Ford still resisted many technological innovations such as hydraulic brakes and all-metal roofs, which Ford vehicles did not adopt until 1935 36. For 1932 however, Ford dropped a bombshell with the flathead Ford V8, the first low-price eight-cylinder engine. The flathead V8, variants of which were used in Ford vehicles for 20 years, was the result of a secret project launched in 1930 and Henry had initially considered a radical X-8 engine before agreeing to a conventional design. It gave Ford a reputation as a performance make well-suited for hot-rodding.[25]
Ford did not believe in accountants; he amassed one of the world's largest fortunes without ever having his company audited under his administration. Without an accounting department, Ford had no way of knowing exactly how much money was being taken in and spent each month, and the company's bills and invoices were reportedly guessed at by weighing them on a scale.[citation needed] Not until 1956 would Ford be a publicly-traded company.[26]
Also, at Edsel's insistence, Ford launched Mercury in 1939 as a mid-range make to challenge Dodge and Buick, although Henry also displayed relatively little enthusiasm for it.[22]
Labor philosophy
Five-dollar wage
 Time magazine, January 14, 1935
Ford was a pioneer of "welfare capitalism", designed to improve the lot of his workers and especially to reduce the heavy turnover that had many departments hiring 300 men per year to fill 100 slots. Efficiency meant hiring and keeping the best workers.[27]
Ford astonished the world in 1914 by offering a $5 per day wage ($140 today), which more than doubled the rate of most of his workers.[28] A Cleveland, Ohio, newspaper editorialized that the announcement "shot like a blinding rocket through the dark clouds of the present industrial depression".[29] The move proved extremely profitable; instead of constant employee turnover, the best mechanics in Detroit flocked to Ford, bringing their human capital and expertise, raising productivity, and lowering training costs.[30][31] Ford announced his $5-per-day program on January 5, 1914, raising the minimum daily pay from $2.34 to $5 for qualifying male workers.[32][33]
Detroit was already a high-wage city, but competitors were forced to raise wages or lose their best workers.[34] Ford's policy proved that paying employees more would enable them to afford the cars they were producing and thus boost the local economy. He viewed the increased wages as profit-sharing linked with rewarding those who were most productive and of good character.[35] It may have been Couzens who convinced Ford to adopt the $5-day wage.[36]
Real profit-sharing was offered to employees who had worked at the company for six months or more, and, importantly, conducted their lives in a manner of which Ford's "Social Department" approved. They frowned on heavy drinking, gambling, and on what are now called deadbeat dads. The Social Department used 50 investigators and support staff to maintain employee standards; a large percentage of workers were able to qualify for this "profit-sharing".[37]
Ford's incursion into his employees' private lives was highly controversial, and he soon backed off from the most intrusive aspects. By the time he wrote his 1922 memoir, he had spoken of the Social Department and the private conditions for profit-sharing in the past tense. He admitted that "paternalism has no place in the industry. Welfare work that consists in prying into employees' private concerns is out of date. Men need counsel and men need help, often special help; and all this ought to be rendered for decency's sake. But the broad workable plan of investment and participation will do more to solidify the industry and strengthen the organization than will any social work on the outside. Without changing the principle we have changed the method of payment."[38]
Five-day workweek
In addition to raising his workers' wages, Ford also introduced a new, reduced workweek in 1926. The decision was made in 1922, when Ford and Crowther described it as six 8-hour days, giving a 48-hour week,[39] but in 1926 it was announced as five 8-hour days, giving a 40-hour week.[40] The program apparently started with Saturday being designated a workday, before becoming a day off sometime later. On May 1, 1926, the Ford Motor Company's factory workers switched to a five-day, 40-hour workweek, with the company's office workers making the transition the following August.[41]
Ford had decided to boost productivity, as workers were expected to put more effort into their work in exchange for more leisure time. Ford also believed decent leisure time was good for business, giving workers additional time to purchase and consume more goods. However, charitable concerns also played a role. Ford explained, "It is high time to rid ourselves of the notion that leisure for workmen is either 'lost time' or a class privilege."[41]
Labor unions
Ford was adamantly against labor unions. He explained his views on unions in Chapter 18 of My Life and Work.[42] He thought they were too heavily influenced by leaders who would end up doing more harm than good for workers despite their ostensible good motives.  Most wanted to restrict productivity as a means to foster employment, but Ford saw this as self-defeating because, in his view, productivity was necessary for economic prosperity to exist.[citation needed]
He believed that productivity gains that obviated certain jobs would nevertheless stimulate the broader economy and grow new jobs elsewhere, whether within the same corporation or in others. Ford also believed that union leaders had a perverse incentive to foment perpetual socio-economic crises to maintain their power. Meanwhile, he believed that smart managers had an incentive to do right by their workers, because doing so would maximize their profits. However, Ford did acknowledge that many managers were basically too bad at managing to understand this fact. But Ford believed that eventually, if good managers such as he could fend off the attacks of misguided people from both left and right (i.e., both socialists and bad-manager reactionaries), the good managers would create a socio-economic system wherein neither bad management nor bad unions could find enough support to continue existing.[citation needed]
To forestall union activity, Ford promoted Harry Bennett, a former Navy boxer, to head the Service Department. Bennett employed various intimidation tactics to quash union organizing.[43] On March 7, 1932, during the Great Depression, unemployed Detroit auto workers staged the Ford Hunger March to the Ford River Rouge Complex to present 14 demands to Henry Ford. The Dearborn police department and Ford security guards opened fire on workers leading to over sixty injuries and five deaths. On May 26, 1937, Bennett's security men beat members of the United Automobile Workers (UAW), including Walter Reuther, with clubs.[44] While Bennett's men were beating the UAW representatives, the supervising police chief on the scene was Carl Brooks, an alumnus of Bennett's Service Department, and [Brooks] "did not give orders to intervene".[45] The following day photographs of the injured UAW members appeared in newspapers, later becoming known as The Battle of the Overpass.[citation needed]
In the late 1930s and early 1940s, Edsel who was president of the company thought Ford had to come to a collective bargaining agreement with the unions because the violence, work disruptions, and bitter stalemates could not go on forever. But Ford, who still had the final veto in the company on a de facto basis even if not an official one, refused to cooperate. For several years, he kept Bennett in charge of talking to the unions trying to organize the Ford Motor Company. Sorensen's memoir[46] makes clear that Ford's purpose in putting Bennett in charge was to make sure no agreements were ever reached.[citation needed]
The Ford Motor Company was the last Detroit automaker to recognize the UAW, despite pressure from the rest of the U.S. automotive industry and even the U.S. government. A sit-down strike by the UAW union in April 1941 closed the River Rouge Plant. Sorensen recounted[47] that a distraught Henry Ford was very close to following through with a threat to break up the company rather than cooperate. Still, his wife Clara told him she would leave him if he destroyed the family business. In her view, it would not be worth the chaos it would create. Ford complied with his wife's ultimatum and even agreed with her in retrospect. Overnight, the Ford Motor Company went from the most stubborn holdout among automakers to the one with the most favorable UAW contract terms. The contract was signed in June 1941.[47] About a year later, Ford told Walter Reuther, "It was one of the most sensible things Harry Bennett ever did when he got the UAW into this plant." Reuther inquired, "What do you mean?" Ford replied, "Well, you've been fighting General Motors and the Wall Street crowd. Now you're in here and we've given you a union shop and more than you got out of them. That puts you on our side, doesn't it? We can fight General Motors and Wall Street together, eh?"[48]
Ford Airplane Company
 Ford 4-AT-F (EC-RRA) of the Spanish Republican Airline, L.A.P.E.
Like other automobile companies, Ford entered the aviation business during World War I, building Liberty engines. After the war, it returned to auto manufacturing until 1925, when Ford acquired the Stout Metal Airplane Company.
Ford's most successful aircraft was the Ford 4AT Trimotor, often called the "Tin Goose" because of its corrugated metal construction. It used a new alloy called Alclad that combined the corrosion resistance of aluminum with the strength of duralumin. The plane was similar to Fokker's V.VII-3m, and some say[who?] that Ford's engineers surreptitiously measured the Fokker plane and then copied it. The Trimotor first flew on June 11, 1926, and was the first successful U.S. passenger airliner, accommodating about 12 passengers in a rather uncomfortable fashion. Several variants were also used by the U.S. Army. The Smithsonian Institution has honored Ford for changing the aviation industry. 199 Trimotors were built before it was discontinued in 1933, when the Ford Airplane Division shut down because of poor sales during the Great Depression.
In 1985, Ford was posthumously inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame for his impact on the industry.[49]
World War I era and peace activism
Further information: Peace Ship and 1918 United States Senate election in Michigan
Ford opposed war, which he viewed as a terrible waste,[50][51] and supported causes that opposed military intervention.[52] Ford became highly critical of those who he felt financed war, and he tried to stop them. In 1915, the pacifist Rosika Schwimmer gained favor with Ford, who agreed to fund a Peace Ship to Europe, where World War I was raging. He led 170 other peace activists. Ford's Episcopalian pastor, Reverend Samuel S. Marquis, accompanied him on the mission. Marquis headed Ford's Sociology Department from 1913 to 1921. Ford talked to President Woodrow Wilson about the mission but had no government support. His group went to neutral Sweden and the Netherlands to meet with peace activists. A target of much ridicule, Ford left the ship as soon as it reached Sweden.[53] In 1915, Ford blamed "German-Jewish bankers" for instigating the war.[54]
According to biographer Steven Watts, Ford's status as a leading industrialist gave him a worldview that warfare was wasteful folly that retarded long-term economic growth. The losing side in the war typically suffered heavy damage. Small business were especially hurt, for it takes years to recuperate. He argued in many newspaper articles that a focus on business efficiency would discourage warfare because,   If every man who manufactures an article would make the very best he can in the very best way at the very lowest possible price the world would be kept out of war, for commercialists would not have to search for outside markets which the other fellow covets.   Ford admitted that munitions makers enjoyed wars, but he argued the most businesses wanted to avoid wars and instead work to manufacture and sell useful goods, hire workers, and generate steady long-term profits.[55]
Ford's British factories produced Fordson tractors to increase the British food supply, as well as trucks and warplane engines. When the U.S. entered the war in 1917, Ford went quiet on foreign policy. His company became a major supplier of weapons, especially the Liberty engine for warplanes and anti-submarine boats.[9]: 95 100, 119 [56]
In 1918, with the war on and the League of Nations a growing issue in global politics, President Woodrow Wilson, a Democrat, encouraged Ford to run for a Michigan seat in the U.S. Senate. Wilson believed that Ford could tip the scales in Congress in favor of Wilson's proposed League. "You are the only man in Michigan who can be elected and help bring about the peace you so desire," the president wrote Ford. Ford wrote back: "If they want to elect me let them do so, but I won't make a penny's investment." Ford did run, however, and came within 7,000 votes of winning, out of more than 400,000 cast statewide.[57] He was defeated in a close election by the Republican candidate, Truman Newberry, a former United States Secretary of the Navy. Ford remained a staunch Wilsonian and supporter of the League. When Wilson made a major speaking tour in the summer of 1919 to promote the League, Ford helped fund the attendant publicity.[58][59]
World War II era and controversies
Ford had opposed the United States' entry into World War II[44][60] and continued to believe that international business could generate the prosperity that would head off wars. Ford "insisted that war was the product of greedy financiers who sought profit in human destruction". In 1939, he went so far as to claim that the torpedoing of U.S. merchant ships by German submarines was the result of conspiratorial activities undertaken by financier war-makers.[61] The financiers to whom he was referring was Ford's code for Jews; he had also accused Jews of fomenting the First World War.[44][62] In the run-up to World War II and when the war erupted in 1939, he reported that he did not want to trade with belligerents. Like many other businessmen of the Great Depression era, he never liked or entirely trusted the Franklin Roosevelt Administration, and thought Roosevelt was inching the U.S. closer to war. Ford continued to do business with Nazi Germany, including the manufacture of war materiel.[44] However, he also agreed to build warplane engines for the British government.[63] In early 1940, he boasted that Ford Motor Company would soon be able to produce 1,000 U.S. warplanes a day, even though it did not have an aircraft production facility at that time.[64]: 430  Ford was a prominent early member of the America First Committee against World War II involvement, but was forced to resign from its executive board when his involvement proved too controversial.[65]
Beginning in 1940, with the requisitioning of between 100 and 200 French POWs to work as slave laborers, Ford-Werke contravened Article 31 of the 1929 Geneva Convention.[44]
When Rolls-Royce sought a U.S. manufacturer as an additional source for the Merlin engine (as fitted to Spitfire and Hurricane fighters), Ford first agreed to do so and then reneged. He "lined up behind the war effort" when the U.S. entered in December 1941.[66]
Willow Run
Before the U.S. entered the war, responding to President Roosevelt's call in December 1940 for the "Great Arsenal of Democracy", Ford directed the Ford Motor Company to construct a vast new purpose-built aircraft factory at Willow Run near Detroit, Michigan. Ford broke ground on Willow Run in the spring (April June) of 1941, B-24 component production began in May 1942, and the first complete B-24 came off the line in October 1942. At 3,500,000 sq ft (330,000 m2), it was the largest assembly line in the world at the time. At its peak in 1944, the Willow Run plant produced 650 B-24s per month, and by 1945 Ford was completing each B-24 in eighteen hours, with one rolling off the assembly line every 58 minutes.[67] Ford produced 9,000 B-24s at Willow Run, half of the 18,000 total B-24s produced during the war.[67][64]: 430 
Edsel's death
When Edsel Ford died of cancer in 1943, aged only 49, Henry Ford nominally resumed control of the company, but a series of strokes in the late 1930s had left him increasingly debilitated, and his mental ability was fading. Ford was increasingly sidelined, and others made decisions in his name.[68] The company was controlled by a handful of senior executives led by Charles Sorensen, an important engineer and production executive at Ford; and Harry Bennett, the chief of Ford's Service Unit, Ford's paramilitary force that spied on, and enforced discipline upon, Ford employees. Ford grew jealous of the publicity Sorensen received and forced Sorensen out in 1944.[69] Ford's incompetence led to discussions in Washington about how to restore the company, whether by wartime government fiat, or by instigating a coup among executives and directors.[70]
Forced out
Nothing happened until 1945 when, with bankruptcy a serious risk, Ford's wife Clara and Edsel's widow Eleanor confronted him and demanded he cede control of the company to his grandson Henry Ford II. They threatened to sell off their stock, which amounted to three quarters of the company's total shares, if he refused. Ford was reportedly infuriated, but had no choice but to give in.[71][better source needed][72] The young man took over and, as his first act of business, fired Harry Bennett.
Antisemitism and The Dearborn Independent
Main article: Dearborn Independent
Part of a series onAntisemitism
Part of Jewish history and discrimination
History
Timeline
Reference
Definitions
Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism
Nexus Task Force
Three Ds
Working definition of antisemitism
Manifestations
Academic
Alt-right
American
History
21st-century
Arab
Argentine
Austrian
Belgian
British
Conservative Party
Labour Party
Canadian
Chinese
Chilean
Costa Rican
Christian
Christian Identity
Creativity
Economic
European
French
21st-century
Gaza War
German
Greek
Holocaust denial
Hungarian
Imperial Russian
Islamic
Italian
Japanese
Medieval
Nation of Islam
Nazism
Neo-Nazi
Strasserism
Norwegian
New
Olympic
Pakistani
Palestinian
Racial
Religious
Russian
Saudi
Secondary
South African
Soviet
Stalinist
Spanish
Swedish
Turkish
Ukrainian
Venezuelan
Worldwide
COVID-19 pandemic incidents
Zionist
Antisemitic tropes
Andinia Plan
Blood libel
Cultural Marxism
Deicide
Dreyfus affair
Finance control
Franklin Prophecy
Host desecration
International Jewish conspiracy
Jewish lobby
Jewish war conspiracy theory
Judensau
Judeo-Bolshevism
 ydokomuna
Judeo-Masonism
Kosher tax
Media control
Rootless cosmopolitan
Doctors' plot
Sl nsk  trial
QAnon
Stab-in-the-back myth
Well poisoning
White genocide
ZOG conspiracy
Antisemitic publications
The Barnes Review
Culture of Critique
Currency Wars
The Dearborn Independent
Ethnic Cleansing
La France juive
Hitlers Zweites Buch
Hunter (William Luther Pierce)
The International Jew
La Libre Parole
Mein Kampf
On the Jews and Their Lies
Our Race Will RuleUndisputed Over The World
Protocols of the Elders of Zion
The Secret RelationshipBetween Blacks and Jews
Siege
The Turner Diaries
Antisemitism on the Internet
4chan (/pol/)
8chan
The Daily Stormer
Gab
Groypers
Jew Watch
Metapedia
Occidental Observer
Renegade Tribune
The Right Stuff
Stormfront
Terrorgram
Triple parentheses
TruNews
The Unz Review
Prominent figures
Mahmoud Abbas
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad
Steven Anderson
Andrew Anglin
Ion Antonescu
Louis Beam
Don Black
James von Brunn
Gheorghe Buzatu
Willis Carto
Houston Stewart Chamberlain
Corneliu Zelea Codreanu
Nichifor Crainic
A. C. Cuza
 douard Drumont
David Duke
Adolf Eichmann
Mike Enoch
Louis Farrakhan
L szl  Ferenczy
Bobby Fischer
Henry Ford
Theodor Fritsch
Nick Fuentes
Joseph Goebbels
Octavian Goga
Matthew F. Hale
Heinrich Himmler
Adolf Hitler
Arthur J. Jones
Jason Kessler
Ali Khamenei
Ben Klassen
Osama bin Laden
David Lane
Ernest G. Liebold
Martin Luther
Dieudonn  M'bala M'bala
Kevin MacDonald
Frazier Glenn Miller
Eustace Mullins
Philippe P tain
Symon Petliura
Fred Phelps
William Luther Pierce
Ezra Pound
George Lincoln Rockwell
Horia Sima
Richard Spencer
Joseph Stalin
Julius Streicher
Kevin Alfred Strom
Wesley A. Swift
Tila Tequila
Joseph Tommasi
Voltaire
Richard Wagner
Weev
Bill White
Rick Wiles
Ernst Z ndel
Persecution
Rhineland massacres
Black Death persecutions
Boycotts
Expulsions
Jewish quarter
Ghettos in Europe
Mellah
The Holocaust
Jewish hat
Jewish quota
Judensau
Martyrdom in Judaism
Nuremberg Laws
Pale of Settlement
Pogroms
Russian Empire
Russian Civil War
Refuseniks
Segregation
Spanish Inquisition
Yellow badge
Opposition
Anti-Defamation League
Campaign Against Antisemitism
Community Security Trust
Fundamental Rights Agency
Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism
Philosemitism
Simon Wiesenthal Center
Southern Poverty Law Center
Stephen Roth Institute
Swedish Committee Against Antisemitism
Union of Councils for Soviet Jews
UN Watch
Wiener Holocaust Library
Working Definition of Antisemitism
Yad Vashem
 Categoryvte
Ford was a conspiracy theorist who drew on a long tradition of false allegations against Jews. Ford claimed that Jewish internationalism posed a threat to traditional American values, which he deeply believed were at risk in the modern world.[73] Part of his racist and antisemitic legacy includes the funding of square-dancing in American schools because he hated jazz and associated its creation with Jewish people.[74] In 1920 Ford wrote, "If fans wish to know the trouble with American baseball they have it in three words too much Jew."[75]
In 1918, Ford purchased his hometown newspaper, The Dearborn Independent.[76] A year and a half later, Ford began publishing a series of articles in the paper under his own name, claiming a vast Jewish conspiracy was affecting America.[77]  The series ran in 91 issues.  Every Ford dealership nationwide was required to carry the paper and distribute it to its customers.  Ford later bound the articles into four volumes entitled The International Jew: The World's Foremost Problem, which was translated into multiple languages and distributed widely across the US and Europe.[78][79] The International Jew blamed nearly all the troubles it saw in American society on Jews.[77]  The Independent ran for eight years, from 1920 until 1927.  With around 700,000 readers of his newspaper, Ford emerged as a "spokesman for right-wing extremism and religious prejudice."[80]
 The Ford publication The International Jew, the World's Foremost Problem. Articles from The Dearborn Independent, 1920
In Germany, Ford's The International Jew, the World's Foremost Problem was published by Theodor Fritsch, founder of several antisemitic parties and a member of the Reichstag. In a letter written in 1924, Heinrich Himmler described Ford as "one of our most valuable, important, and witty fighters".[81] Ford is the only American mentioned favorably in Hitler's autobiography Mein Kampf.[82] Adolf Hitler wrote, "only a single great man, Ford, [who], to [the Jews'] fury, still maintains full independence ... [from] the controlling masters of the producers in a nation of one hundred and twenty millions." Speaking in 1931 to a Detroit News reporter, Hitler said "I regard Henry Ford as my inspiration," explaining his reason for keeping a life-size portrait of Ford behind his desk.[83][78] Steven Watts wrote that Hitler "revered" Ford, proclaiming that "I shall do my best to put his theories into practice in Germany", and modeling the Volkswagen Beetle, the people's car, on the Model T.[84] Max Wallace has stated, "History records that ... Adolf Hitler was an ardent Anti-Semite before he ever read Ford's The International Jew."[85] Ford also paid to print and distribute 500,000 copies the antisemitic fabricated text The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.[86][87]  Historians say Hitler distributed Ford s books and articles throughout Germany, stoking the hatred that helped fuel the Holocaust.[87]
On February 1, 1924, Ford received Kurt Ludecke, a representative of Hitler, at home. Ludecke was introduced to Ford by Siegfried Wagner (son of the composer Richard Wagner) and his wife Winifred, both Nazi sympathizers and antisemites. Ludecke asked Ford for a contribution to the Nazi cause, but was apparently refused.[88]
Ford's articles were denounced by the Anti-Defamation League (ADL). While these articles explicitly condemned pogroms and violence against Jews, they blamed the Jews themselves for provoking them.[89] According to some trial testimony, none of this work was written by Ford, but he allowed his name to be used as an author. Friends and business associates said they warned Ford about the contents of the Independent and that he probably never read the articles (he claimed he only read the headlines).[90] On the other hand, court testimony in a libel suit, brought by one of the targets of the newspaper, alleged that Ford did know about the contents of the Independent in advance of publication.[44]
A libel lawsuit was brought by San Francisco lawyer and Jewish farm cooperative organizer Aaron Sapiro in response to the antisemitic remarks, and led Ford to close the Independent in December 1927. News reports at the time quoted him as saying he was shocked by the content and unaware of its nature. During the trial, the editor of Ford's "Own Page", William Cameron, testified that Ford had nothing to do with the editorials even though they were under his byline. Cameron testified at the libel trial that he never discussed the content of the pages or sent them to Ford for his approval.[91] Investigative journalist Max Wallace noted that "whatever credibility this absurd claim may have had was soon undermined when James M. Miller, a former Dearborn Independent employee, swore under oath that Ford had told him he intended to expose Sapiro."[92]
Michael Barkun observed: "That Cameron would have continued to publish such anti-Semitic material without Ford's explicit instructions seemed unthinkable to those who knew both men. Mrs. Stanley Ruddiman, a Ford family intimate, remarked that "I don't think Mr. Cameron ever wrote anything for publication without Mr. Ford's approval."[93] According to Spencer Blakeslee, "[t]he ADL mobilized prominent Jews and non-Jews to publicly oppose Ford's message. They formed a coalition of Jewish groups for the same purpose and raised constant objections in the Detroit press. Before leaving his presidency early in 1921, Woodrow Wilson joined other leading Americans in a statement that rebuked Ford and others for their antisemitic campaign. A boycott against Ford products by Jews and liberal Christians also had an impact, and Ford shut down the paper in 1927, recanting his views in a public letter to Sigmund Livingston, president of the ADL."[94] Wallace also found that Ford's apology was likely, or at least partly, motivated by a business that was slumping as a result of his antisemitism, repelling potential buyers of Ford cars.[44] Up until the apology, a considerable number of dealers, who had been required to make sure that buyers of Ford cars received the Independent, bought up and destroyed copies of the newspaper rather than alienate customers.[44]
Ford's 1927 apology was well received. "Four-fifths of the hundreds of letters addressed to Ford in July 1927 were from Jews, and almost without exception they praised the industrialist..."[95] In January 1937, a Ford statement to The Detroit Jewish Chronicle disavowed "any connection whatsoever with the publication in Germany of a book known as the International Jew".[95] Ford, however, allegedly never signed the retraction and apology, which were written by others rather, his signature was forged by Harry Bennett and Ford never actually recanted his antisemitic views, stating in 1940: "I hope to republish The International Jew again some time."[96]
 Grand Cross of the German Eagle, an award bestowed on Ford by Nazi Germany
In July 1938, the German consul in Cleveland gave Ford, on his 75th birthday, the award of the Grand Cross of the German Eagle, the highest medal Nazi Germany could bestow on a foreigner.[83][97] James D. Mooney, vice president of overseas operations for General Motors, received a similar medal, the Merit Cross of the German Eagle, First Class.[83][98]
On January 7, 1942, Ford wrote another letter to Sigmund Livingston disclaiming direct or indirect support of "any agitation which would promote antagonism toward my Jewish fellow citizens". He concluded the letter with, "My sincere hope that now in this country and throughout the world when the war is finished, hatred of the Jews and hatred against any other racial or religious groups shall cease for all time."[99]
The distribution of The International Jew was halted in 1942 through legal action by Ford, despite complications from a lack of copyright.[95] It is still banned in Germany. Extremist groups often recycle the material; it still appears on antisemitic and neo-Nazi websites. Testifying at Nuremberg, convicted Hitler Youth leader Baldur von Schirach who, in his role as Gauleiter of Vienna, deported 65,000 Jews to camps in Poland, stated: "The decisive anti-Semitic book I was reading and the book that influenced my comrades was ... that book by Henry Ford, The International Jew. I read it and became anti-Semitic. The book made a great influence on myself and my friends because we saw in Henry Ford the representative of success and also the representative of a progressive social policy."[100]
Robert Lacey wrote in Ford: The Men and the Machines that a close Willow Run associate of Ford reported that when he was shown newsreel footage of the Nazi concentration camps, he "was confronted with the atrocities which finally and unanswerably laid bare the bestiality of the prejudice to which he contributed, he collapsed with a stroke   his last and most serious."[101] Ford had suffered previous strokes and his final cerebral hemorrhage occurred in 1947 at age 83.[102]
International business
Ford's philosophy was one of economic independence for the United States. His River Rouge Plant became the world's largest industrial complex, pursuing vertical integration to such an extent that it could produce its own steel. Ford's goal was to produce a vehicle from scratch without reliance on foreign trade. He believed in the global expansion of his company. He believed that international trade and cooperation led to international peace, and he used the assembly line process and production of the Model T to demonstrate it.[103]
He opened Ford assembly plants in Britain and Canada in 1911, and soon became the biggest automotive producer in those countries. In 1912, Ford cooperated with Giovanni Agnelli of Fiat to launch the first Italian automotive assembly plants. The first plants in Germany were built in the 1920s with the encouragement of Herbert Hoover and the Commerce Department, which agreed with Ford's theory that international trade was essential to world peace and reduced the chance of war.[104] In the 1920s, Ford also opened plants in Australia, India, and France, and by 1929, he had successful dealerships on six continents. Ford experimented with a commercial rubber plantation in the Amazon jungle called Fordl ndia; it was one of his few failures.
 After signing the contract for technical assistance in building Nizhny Novgorod (Gorky) Automobile Plant. Dearborn, Mich., May 31, 1929. Left to right, Valery I. Mezhlauk, Vice Chairman of VSNKh; Henry Ford; Saul G. Bron, President of Amtorg.
In 1929, Ford made an agreement with the Soviets to provide technical aid over nine years in building the first Soviet automobile plant (GAZ) near Nizhny Novgorod (Gorky)[105] (an additional contract for construction of the plant was signed with The Austin Company on August 23, 1929).[106] The contract involved the purchase of $30,000,000 worth of knocked-down Ford cars and trucks for assembly during the first four years of the plant's operation, after which the plant would gradually switch to Soviet-made components. Ford sent his engineers and technicians to the Soviet Union to help install the equipment and train the workforce, while over a hundred Soviet engineers and technicians were stationed at Ford's plants in Detroit and Dearborn "for the purpose of learning the methods and practice of manufacture and assembly in the Company's plants".[107] Said Ford: "No matter where industry prospers, whether in India or China, or Russia, the more profit there will be for everyone, including us. All the world is bound to catch some good from it."[108]
By 1932, Ford was manufacturing one-third of the world's automobiles. It set up numerous subsidiaries that sold or assembled the Ford cars and trucks:
Ford of Australia
Ford of Britain
Ford of Argentina
Ford of Brazil
Ford of Canada
Ford of Europe
Ford India
Ford South Africa
Ford Mexico
Ford Philippines
 Henry Ford in Germany; September 1930
Ford's image transfixed Europeans, especially the Germans, arousing the "fear of some, the infatuation of others, and the fascination among all".[109] Germans who discussed "Fordism" often believed that it represented something quintessentially American. They saw the size, tempo, standardization, and philosophy of production demonstrated at the Ford Works as a national service an "American thing" that represented the culture of the United States. Both supporters and critics insisted that Fordism epitomized American capitalist development, and that the auto industry was the key to understanding economic and social relations in the United States. As one German explained, "Automobiles have so completely changed the American's mode of life that today one can hardly imagine being without a car. It is difficult to remember what life was like before Mr. Ford began preaching his doctrine of salvation".[110] For many Germans, Ford embodied the essence of successful Americanism.
In My Life and Work, Ford predicted that if greed, racism, and short-sightedness could be overcome, then economic and technological development throughout the world would progress to the point that international trade would no longer be based on (what today would be called) colonial or neocolonial models and would truly benefit all peoples.[111]
Racing
 Ford (standing) launched Barney Oldfield's career in 1902.
Ford maintained an interest in auto racing from 1901 to 1913 and began his involvement in the sport as both a constructor and a driver, later turning the wheel over to hired drivers. On October 10, 1901, he defeated Alexander Winton in a race car named "Sweepstakes"; it was through the wins of this car that Ford created the Henry Ford Company.[112] Ford entered stripped-down Model Ts in races, finishing first (although later disqualified) in an "ocean-to-ocean" (across the United States) race in 1909, and setting a one-mile (1.6 km) oval speed record at Detroit Fairgrounds in 1911 with driver Frank Kulick. In 1913, he attempted to enter a reworked Model T in the Indianapolis 500 but was told rules required the addition of another 1,000 pounds (450 kg) to the car before it could qualify. Ford dropped out of the race and soon thereafter exited racing permanently, citing dissatisfaction with the sport's rules, demands on his time by the booming production of the Model T, and his low opinion of racing as a worthwhile activity.
In My Life and Work Ford speaks (briefly) of racing in a rather dismissive tone, as something that is not at all a good measure of automobiles in general. He describes himself as someone who raced only because in the 1890s through 1910s, one had to race because prevailing ignorance held that racing was the way to prove the worth of an automobile. Ford did not agree. But he was determined that as long as this was the definition of success (flawed though the definition was), then his cars would be the best that there were at racing.[113] Throughout the book, he continually returns to ideals such as transportation, production efficiency, affordability, reliability, fuel efficiency, economic prosperity, and the automation of drudgery in farming and industry, but rarely mentions, and rather belittles, the idea of merely going fast from point A to point B.
Nevertheless, Ford did make quite an impact on auto racing during his racing years, and he was inducted into the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 1996.[114]
Later career and death
When Edsel Ford, President of Ford Motor Company, died of cancer in May 1943, the elderly and ailing Henry Ford decided to assume the presidency. By this point, Ford, nearing 80 years old, had had several cardiovascular events (variously cited as heart attacks or strokes) and was mentally inconsistent, suspicious, and generally no longer fit for such immense responsibilities.[115]
Most of the directors did not want to see him as president. But for the previous 20 years, though he had long been without any official executive title, he had always had de facto control over the company; the board and the management had never seriously defied him, and this time was no different. The directors elected him,[116] and he served until the end of the war. During this period the company began to decline, losing more than $10 million a month ($156,600,000 today). The administration of President Franklin Roosevelt had been considering a government takeover of the company in order to ensure continued war production,[70] but the idea never progressed.
 Ford grave, Ford Cemetery
His health failing, Ford ceded the company presidency to his grandson Henry Ford II in September 1945 and retired. He died on April 7, 1947, of a cerebral hemorrhage at Fair Lane, his estate in Dearborn, at the age of 83. A public viewing was held at Greenfield Village where up to 5,000 people per hour filed past the casket. Funeral services were held in Detroit's Cathedral Church of St. Paul and he was buried in the Ford Cemetery in Detroit.[102][117]
Personal interests
A compendium of short biographies of famous Freemasons, published by a Freemason lodge, lists Ford as a member.[118] The Grand Lodge of New York confirms that Ford was a Freemason, and was raised in Palestine Lodge No. 357, Detroit, in 1894. When he received the 33rd degree of the Scottish Rite in 1940, he said, "Masonry is the best balance wheel the United States has."[119]
In 1923, Ford's pastor, and head of his sociology department, Episcopal minister Samuel S. Marquis, claimed that Ford believed, or "once believed," in reincarnation.[120]
Ford published an anti-smoking book, circulated to youth in 1914, called The Case Against the Little White Slaver, which documented many dangers of cigarette smoking attested to by many researchers and luminaries.[121] At the time, smoking was ubiquitous and not yet widely associated with health problems, making Ford's opposition to cigarettes unusual.
Interest in materials science and engineering
Henry Ford had a long-held interest in materials science and engineering. He enthusiastically described his company's adoption of vanadium steel alloys and subsequent metallurgic R&D work.[122]
Ford also had a long-standing interest in plastics developed from agricultural products, particularly soybeans. He cultivated a relationship with George Washington Carver for this purpose.[123][124][125] Soybean-based plastics were used in Ford automobiles throughout the 1930s in plastic parts such as car horns, in paint and other components. The project culminated in 1942, when Ford patented an automobile made almost entirely of plastic, attached to a tubular welded frame. It weighed 30% less than a steel car and was said to be able to withstand blows ten times greater than steel. It ran on grain alcohol (ethanol) instead of gasoline. The design never caught on.[126]
Ford was interested in engineered woods ("Better wood can be made than is grown"[127]) (at this time plywood and particle board were little more than experimental ideas); corn as a fuel source, via both corn oil and ethanol;[128] and the potential uses of cotton.[127] Ford was instrumental in developing charcoal briquets, under the brand name "Kingsford". His brother-in-law, Edward G. Kingsford, used wood scraps from the Ford factory to make the briquets.
In 1927, Ford partnered with Thomas Edison and Harvey Samuel Firestone (each contributing $25,000) to create the Edison Botanic Research Corp. in Fort Myers, Florida to seek a native source of rubber.
Ford was a prolific inventor and was awarded 161 U.S. patents.
Florida and Georgia residences and community
Ford had a vacation residence in Fort Myers, Florida, next to that of Thomas Edison, which he bought in 1915 and used until approximately 1930. It still stands today as a museum.[129]
He also had a vacation home (known today as the "Ford Plantation") in Richmond Hill, Georgia, which is now a private community. Ford started buying land in this area and eventually owned 70,000 acres (110 square miles) there.[130] In 1936, Ford broke ground for a beautiful Greek revival style mansion on the banks of the Ogeechee River on the site of a 1730s plantation. The grand house, made of Savannah-gray brick, had marble steps, air conditioning, and an elevator. It sat on 55 acres (22 ha) of manicured lawns and flowering gardens. The house became the center of social gatherings with visitations by the Vanderbilts, Rockefellers, and the DuPonts. It remains the centerpiece of The Ford Plantation today.[131] Ford converted the 1870s-era rice mill into his personal research laboratory and powerhouse and constructed a tunnel from there to the new home, providing it with steam. He contributed substantially to the community, building a chapel and schoolhouse and employing numerous local residents.
Preserving Americana
Ford had an interest in "Americana". In the 1920s, he began work to turn Sudbury, Massachusetts, into a themed historical village. He moved the schoolhouse supposedly referred to in the "Mary Had a Little Lamb" nursery rhyme from Sterling, Massachusetts, and purchased the historic Wayside Inn. The historical village plan never came to fruition. He repeated the concept of collecting historic structures with the creation of Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Michigan. It may have inspired the creation of Old Sturbridge Village as well. About the same time, he began collecting materials for his museum, which had a theme of practical technology. It was opened in 1929 as the Edison Institute. The museum has been greatly modernized and is still open today.
In popular culture
 Henry and Clara Ford in his first car, the Ford Quadricycle
In Aldous Huxley's Brave New World (1932), society is organized on "Fordist" lines, the years are dated A.F. or Anno Ford ("In the Year of Ford"), and the expression "My Ford" is used instead of "My Lord". The Christian cross is replaced with a capital "T" for Model-T.
Upton Sinclair created a fictional description of Ford in the 1937 novel The Flivver King.
Symphonic composer Ferde Grof  composed a tone poem in Henry Ford's honor (1938).
Ford appears as a character in several historical novels, notably E. L. Doctorow's Ragtime (1975), and Richard Powers' Three Farmers on Their Way to a Dance (1985).[132][133]
Ford, his family, and his company were the subjects of a 1987 film starring Cliff Robertson  and  Michael Ironside, based on the 1986 biography Ford: The Man and the Machine by Robert Lacey.
In the 2004 alternative history novel The Plot Against America, Philip Roth features Ford as Secretary of the Interior in a fictional Charles Lindbergh presidential administration after Lindbergh's victory over Roosevelt in the 1940 presidential election. The novel draws heavily on the administration's antisemitism and isolationism as a catalyst for its plot.
In the 2020 HBO adapted miniseries of the same name, Ford is portrayed by actor Ed Moran.
Ford appears as a Great Builder in the 2008 strategy video game Civilization Revolution.[134]
In the fictional history of the Assassin's Creed video game franchise, Ford is portrayed as having been a major Templar influence on the events of the Great Depression, and later World War II.[135][136]
Honors and recognition
In December 1999, Ford was among 18 included in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th Century, from a poll conducted of the American people.
In 1928, Ford was awarded the Franklin Institute's Elliott Cresson Medal.
In 1938, Ford was awarded Nazi Germany's Grand Cross of the German Eagle, a medal given to foreigners sympathetic to Nazism.[137]
The United States Postal Service honored Ford with a Prominent Americans series (1965 1978) 12  postage stamp.
He was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame in 1946.[138][139]
In 1975, Ford was posthumously inducted into the Junior Achievement U.S. Business Hall of Fame.[140]
In 1985, he was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame.[49]
He was inducted into the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 1996.[141]
See also
Capitalist peace
Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad
Dodge v. Ford Motor Company
Edison and Ford Winter Estates
Arthur Constantin Krebs
Ferdinand Porsche
Ferdinand Verbiest
Ford family tree
John Burroughs
List of covers of Time magazine (1920s)
List of richest Americans in history
List of wealthiest historical figures
Outline of Henry Ford
Preston Tucker
Ransom Olds
William Benson Mayo
References
^ www.hfmgv.org The Henry Ford Museum: The Life of Henry Ford Archived October 24, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
^ "The history of Ford in Ireland". Archived from the original on November 19, 2017.
^ Henry Ford Biography, Education, Inventions, & Facts. Retrieved February 6, 2022.
^ Nevins and Hill (1954), 1:90.
^ Ford, My Life and Work, 22 24; Nevins and Hill, Ford TMC, 58.
^ Evans, Harold "They Made America" Little, Brown and Company. New York
^ Ford, My Life and Work, 24; Edward A. Guest "Henry Ford Talks About His Mother," American Magazine, July 1923, 11 15, 116 20.
^ Watts, Steven (2006). The People's Tycoon: Henry Ford and the American Century. Random House, Inc. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-307-55897-8.
^ a b Ford, Henry (2019). My Life and Work. Columbia. pp. 12 17. ISBN 9781545549117.
^ "Widow of Automobile Pioneer, Victim of Coronary Occlusion, Survived Him Three Years". Associated Press. September 29, 1950.
^ "Edsel Ford Dies in Detroit at 49. Motor Company President, the Only Son of Its Founder, Had Long Been Ill". Associated Press. May 26, 1943. Edsel Ford, 49-year-old president of the Ford Motor Company, died this morning at his home at Grosse Pointe Shores following an illness of six weeks.
^ The Showroom of Automotive History: 1896 Quadricycle Archived June 15, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
^ a b c d e f g h i Ford R. Bryan, "The Birth of Ford Motor Company" Archived August 29, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Henry Ford Heritage Association, retrieved August 20, 2012.
^ Richard Bak, Henry and Edsel: The Creation of the Ford Empire (2003) pp. 54 63
^ "The Life of Henry Ford". Archived from the original on October 5, 2001. Retrieved November 28, 2013.
^ Nevins (1954) 1:387 415
^ Lewis 1976, pp. 41 59
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, p. 72.
^ "Beetle overtakes Model T as world's best-selling car". HISTORY. Retrieved June 26, 2022.
^ Nevins and Hill (1957) vol. 2
^ "Lincoln Motor Company Plant". National Park Service. August 29, 2018. Retrieved July 1, 2021.
^ a b King 2003
^ Nevins and Hill (1957) 2:409 36
^ Sorensen 1956, p. 223.
^ Nevins and Hill (1957) 2:459 78
^ "Ford Motor Company - Investors - Information - Stock Information".
^ Nevins and Hill (1957) 2:508 40
^ Using the consumer price index, this was equivalent to $111.10 per day in 2008 dollars.
^ Lewis, Public Image p. 71
^ Nevins, Ford 1:528 41
^ Watts, People's Tycoon, pp. 178 94
^ Ciwek, Sarah (January 27, 2014). "The Middle Class Took Off 100 Years Ago ... Thanks To Henry Ford?". NPR.org. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2021.
^ The Learning Network (January 5, 2012). "Jan. 5, 1914 : Henry Ford Implements the $5-a-Day Wage". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2021.
^ Watts, People's Tycoon, pp. 193 94
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, pp. 126 30.
^ Lewis, Public Image, 69 70
^ "Helpful Hints and Advice to Ford Employes [sic]". www.thehenryford.org. Detroit: Ford Motor Company. 1915. pp. 8 9. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2021.
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, p. 130.
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, p. 126.
^ Samuel Crowther (October 1926). "Henry Ford: "Why I Favor Five Days' Work With Six Days' Pay"". World's Work. pp. 613 16. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020.
^ a b "May 01, 1926 : Ford Factory workers get 40-hour week". Archived from the original on March 25, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018.
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, pp. 253 66.
^ Harris, J: Henry Ford, pp. 91 92. Moffa Press, 1984.
^ a b c d e f g h Wallace, Max. (2003). The American axis: Henry Ford, Charles Lindbergh, and the rise of the Third Reich. New York: St. Martin's Press.
^ Wallace 2003, p. 311 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWallace2003 (help)
^ Sorensen 1956, p. 261.
^ a b Sorensen 1956, pp. 266 72.
^ Reuther., Dickmeyer, Elisabeth (2004). Putting the world together : my father Walter Reuther, the liberal warrior. Lake Orion, Mich.: LivingForce Pub. p. 63. ISBN 978-0-9753792-1-9. OCLC 57172289.
^ a b Ford, Henry Archived October 15, 2021, at the Wayback Machine at the National Aviation Hall of Fame
^ Henry Ford, Biography (March 25, 1999). A&E Television.
^ Michigan History, January/February 1993
^ "Examining the American peace movement prior to World War I". April 6, 2017.
^ Watts (2005). The People's Tycoon. A.A. Knopf. pp. 225 49. ISBN 9780375407352.
^ Norwood, Stephen Harlan. Encyclopedia of American Jewish History. Vol. 1. Abc-clio, 2008, p.182
^ Steven Watts, The people's tycoon: Henry Ford and the American century (Vintage, 2009). Pp 236-237.
^ Allan Nevins and Frank Ernest Hill, Ford: Expansion and Challenge, 1915 1933 (1957) 2:55 85
^ Banham, Russ. (2002) The Ford Century. Tehabi Books. ISBN 1-887656-88-X, p. 44.
^ Watts (2005). The People's Tycoon. A.A. Knopf. p. 378. ISBN 9780375407352.
^ John Milton Cooper Jr, Woodrow Wilson: A Biography (2009) p. 521
^ Baldwin, Neil (2001). Henry Ford and the Jews: The Mass Production of Hate. New York: Public Affairs.
^ Stephen Watts, The People's Tycoon (2005) p. 505
^ Baldwin
^ "WWII and Ford Motor Company   Michigan History".
^ a b Sward, Keith (1948). The Legend of Henry Ford. Rinehart & Company Inc. Retrieved April 26, 2020.
^ Dunn, Susan (2013). 1940 : FDR, Willkie, Lindbergh, Hitler--the election amid the storm. New Haven [Conn.]: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-19513-2. OCLC 847526899.
^ Watts, The People's Tycoon (2005) p. 508
^ a b Nolan, Jenny. "Michigan History: Willow Run and the Arsenal of Democracy." The Detroit News, January 28, 1997. Retrieved: August 7, 2010.
^ Watts, The People's Tycoon (2005) p. 503
^ Watts, The People's Tycoon (2005) pp. 522 25
^ a b Sorensen 1956, pp. 324 333.
^ Yates, Brock. "10 Best Moguls", in Car and Driver, 1/88, p. 45.
^ Watts, The People's Tycoon (2005) pp. 522 27
^ Michael Alexander, Review of "Henry Ford and the Jews: The Mass Production of Hate." Jewish Quarterly Review 94#4 (2004), pp. 716-718 online
^ Pennacchia, Robyn (December 12, 2017). "America's wholesome square dancing tradition is a tool of white supremacy". Quartz. Retrieved June 16, 2019.
^ Zeitlin, Alan (November 15, 2010). "Jews and Baseball Is a Film You Should Catch". The New York Blueprint. Archived from the original on December 10, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2014. (citing the 2010 documentary film Jews and Baseball: An American Love Story, by Pulitzer Prize winner Ira Berkow)
^ "The Dearborn Independent, February 20, 1926 - The Henry Ford". www.thehenryford.org. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ a b "Ford's Anti-Semitism | American Experience | PBS". www.pbs.org. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ a b "Henry Ford and the Jews, the story Dearborn didn't want told | Bridge Michigan". www.bridgemi.com. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ "The International Jew: 1920s Antisemitism Revived Online | ADL". www.adl.org. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ Glock, Charles Y. and Quinley, Harold E. (1983). Anti-Semitism in America. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-87855-940-X, p. 168.
^ Allen, Michael Thad (2002). The Business of Genocide: The SS, Slave Labor, and the Concentration Camps. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. pp. 14, 290. ISBN 978-0-8078-2677-5.  See also, Pfal-Traughber, Armin (1993). Der antisemitisch-antifreimaurerische Verschw rungsmythos in der Weimarer Republik und im NS-Staat. Vienna: Braum ller. p. 39..  See also: Eliten-Antisemitismus in Nazi-Kontinuit t. Archived July 30, 2017, at the Wayback Machine In: Graswurzelrevolution. December 2003.  Pfal-Traughber and Allen both cite Ackermann. Heinrich Himmler als Ideologe. p. 37.
^ Mein Kampf  pp. 929, 930
^ a b c d "Ford and GM Scrutinized for Alleged Nazi Collaboration". The Washington Post. November 30, 1998. pp. A01. Retrieved March 5, 2008.
^ Watts, p. xi.
^ Wallace, Max. The American Axis: Henry Ford, Charles Lindberg and the Rise of the Third Reich, St. Martin's Griffin, New York, p. 52
^ Rudin, A. James (October 10, 2014). "The dark legacy of Henry Ford's anti-Semitism". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 14, 2018.
^ a b Eisenstein, Paul A. "Mayor's attempt to censor local article about Henry Ford's anti-Semitism draws national attention". CNBC. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ Max Wallace. The American Axis: Henry Ford, Charles Lindbergh, and the Rise of the Third Reich, (Macmillan, 2004), pp. 50 54, ISBN 0-312-33531-8. Years later, in 1977, Winifred claimed that Ford had told her that he had helped finance Hitler. This anecdote is the suggestion that Ford made a contribution. The company has always denied that any contribution was made, and no documentary evidence has ever been found (ibid p. 54). However, according to a captured Nazi document, the German subsidiary of Ford made a personal present to Hitler of 35,000 Reichsmarks in honor of his 50th birthday, in April 1939.[83] See also Neil Baldwin, Henry Ford and the Jews: The Mass Production of Hate (Public Affairs, 2002), pp. 185 89, ISBN 1-58648-163-0.
^ Ford, Henry (2003). The International Jew: The World's Foremost Problem. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 0-7661-7829-3, p. 61.
^ Watts pp. x, 376 87; Lewis (1976) pp. 135 59.
^ Lewis, (1976) pp. 140 56; Baldwin pp. 220 21.
^ Wallace, Max. (2003). The American Axis: Ford, Lindbergh, and the Rise of the Third Reich. New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 30.
^ Barkun, Michael (1996). Religion and the Racist Right: The Origins of the Christian Identity Movement. UNC Press. ISBN 0-8078-4638-4, p. 35.
^ Blakeslee, Spencer (2000). The Death of American Antisemitism. Praeger/Greenwood. ISBN 0-275-96508-2, p. 83.
^ a b c Lewis, David I. (1976). The Public Image of Henry Ford: An American Folk Hero and His Company. Wayne State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8143-1553-8., pp. 146 54.
^ Pool & Pool 1978
^ Kampeas, Ron (February 8, 2020). "At Ford-sponsored Auschwitz exhibit, no sign of founder's role in Nazi machine". Times of Israel. Retrieved February 5, 2022.
^ Farber, David R. (2002). Sloan Rules: Alfred P. Sloan and the Triumph of General Motors. University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-23804-0, p. 228.
^ "Arnstein & Lehr, The First 120 Years" (Louis A. Lehr, Jr.)(Amazon), p. 32
^ Baldur von Schirach before the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg. May 23, 1946.
^ Lacey, Robert (1986). Ford. pp. 218 219.; which in turn cites:
"The Poor Mr Ford". Josephine Fellows Gomon Papers. draft manuscript. Vol. Box 10. Bentley Historical Library.
^ a b "Leader in Production Founded Vast Empire in Motors in 1903. He had Retired in 1945. Began Company With Capital of $28,000 Invested by His Friends and Neighbors. Henry Ford Is Dead. Founder of Vast Automotive Empire and Leader in Mass Production". The New York Times. Associated Press. April 4, 1947. Archived from the original on January 26, 2020. Retrieved January 1, 2020.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Watts 236 40
^ Wilkins
^ Melnikova-Raich, Sonia (2011). "The Soviet Problem with Two 'Unknowns': How an American Architect and a Soviet Negotiator Jump-Started the Industrialization of Russia, Part II: Saul Bron". IA, The Journal of the Society for Industrial Archeology. 37 (1/2): 5 28. ISSN 0160-1040. JSTOR 23757906.
^ Austin, Richard Cartwright (2004). Building Utopia: Erecting Russia's First Modern City, 1930. Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-1-61277-321-6. OCLC 819325601.
^ Agreement Between the Ford Motor Company, the Supreme Council of National Economy, and the Amtorg Trading Corporation, May 31, 1929, Amtorg Records 1929 1930, Acc. 199, box 1a, Benson Ford Research Center, The Henry Ford, Dearborn, Mich.
^ The New York Times, May 5 and 7, 1929.
^ Nolan p. 31.
^ Nolan, p. 31.
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, pp. 242 44.
^ Sturniolo, Zach (October 10, 2022). "Leonard Wood gifts Edsel Ford half-scale replica of historic Sweepstakes". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. Retrieved October 11, 2022.
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, p. 50.
^ Kidder, David S.; Oppenheim, Noah D. (October 14, 2008). The Intellectual Devotional Modern Culture: Revive Your Mind, Complete Your Education, and Converse Confidently with the Culturati. Rodale. ISBN 978-1-60529-793-4.
^ Sorensen 1956, pp. 100, 266, 271 72, 310 14
^ Sorensen 1956, pp. 325 26.
^ Don Lochbeiler (July 22, 1997). "I think Mr. Ford is Leaving Us". The Detroit News Michigan History. detnews.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved October 29, 2010.
^ Denslow 2004, p. 62.
^ "Famous Masons". MWGLNY. January 2014. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013.
^ Marquis, Samuel S. ([1923]/2007). Henry Ford: An Interpretation. Wayne State University Press.
^ The Case Against the Little White Slaver
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, pp. 18,65 67.
^ "George Washington Carver   Visionaries on Innovation". www.thehenryford.org. Retrieved October 22, 2017.
^ "George Washington Carver begins experimental project with Henry Ford   July 19, 1942". HISTORY.com. Retrieved October 22, 2017.
^ "George Washington Carver Examining Soy Fiber, Soybean Laboratory at Greenfield Village, 1939". www.thehenryford.org. Retrieved October 22, 2017.
^ Lewis 1995 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFLewis1995 (help).
^ a b Ford & Crowther 1922, p. 281.
^ Ford & Crowther 1922, pp. 275 276.
^ "Fort Myers Museums, Attractions, Things to do | Edison Ford Winter Estates".
^ Seibert, David. "Henry Ford at Richmond Hill". GeorgiaInfo: an Online Georgia Almanac. Digital Library of Georgia. Retrieved November 7, 2016.
^ "Home". The Ford Field & River Club. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2021.
^ Hill, Andrew (August 19, 2015). "EL Doctorow's 'Ragtime' is still timely on tycoons". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
^ Ku n r, Jaroslav (2017). "History, Art and Consumerism  Richard Powers' Three Farmers on Their Way to a Dance". CLEaR. 4 (1): 11 16. doi:10.1515/clear-2017-0002. S2CID 54492211.
^ Civilization Revolution: Great People Archived March 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine "CivFanatics" Retrieved on September 4, 2009
^ Bertz, Matt (March 23, 2012). "Assassin's Creed III: Evolution of the Templar Order". Game Informer. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved February 12, 2021.
^ Mirowski, Jakub (April 19, 2020). "Adolf Hitler   Nazi puppet of the order. History according to Assassin's Creed". Game Pressure. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved February 12, 2021.
^ Wallace, Max. The American Axis: Henry Ford, Charles Lindbergh, and the Rise of the Third Reich. New York: St. Martin's Press.
^ "Ten pioneers are named to automotive Hall of Fame". Toledo Blade. Toledo, Ohio. May 1, 1946. p. 10. Retrieved March 5, 2016.
^ "Henry Ford". Hall of Fame Inductees. Automotive Hall of Fame. 1946. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2016.
^ Francomano, Joe; Lavitt, Darryl; Lavitt, Wayne (1988). Junior Achievement: A History. Junior Achievement, Inc. p. 89.
^ Henry Ford at the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America
Bibliography
Foust, James C. (1997). "Mass-produced Reform: Henry Ford's Dearborn Independent". American Journalism. 14 (3 4): 411 424. doi:10.1080/08821127.1997.10731933.
Higham, Charles, Trading with the Enemy The Nazi American Money Plot 1933 1949; Delacorte Press 1983
Kandel, Alan D. "Ford and Israel" Michigan Jewish History 1999 39: 13 17. covers business and philanthropy
King, Jenny (June 16, 2003). "Lincoln Mercury: Stumbling stepchild". Automotive News. Detroit. ProQuest 219377741. Retrieved June 30, 2021   via ProQuest.
Lee, Albert; Henry Ford and the Jews; Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1980; ISBN 0-8128-2701-5
Lewis, David L. (1984). "Henry Ford's Anti-semitism and its Repercussions". Michigan Jewish History. 24 (1): 3 10.
Reich, Simon (1999) "The Ford Motor Company and the Third Reich" Dimensions, 13(2):15 17 online
Ribuffo, Leo P. (1980). "Henry Ford and the International Jew". American Jewish History. 69 (4): 437 77.
Sapiro, Aaron L. (1982). "A Retrospective View of the Aaron Sapiro-Henry Ford Case". Western States Jewish Historical Quarterly. 15 (1): 79 84.
Silverstein, K. (2000). "Ford and the F hrer". The Nation. Vol. 270, no. 3. pp. 11 16.
Woeste, Victoria Saker. (2004). "Insecure Equality: Louis Marshall, Henry Ford, and the Problem of Defamatory Antisemitism, 1920 1929". Journal of American History. 91 (3): 877 905. doi:10.2307/3662859. JSTOR 3662859.
Further reading
Memoirs by Ford Motor Company principals
Ford, Henry; Crowther, Samuel (1922), My Life and Work, Garden City, New York, USA: Garden City Publishing Company, Inc. Various republications, including ISBN 9781406500189. Original is public domain in U.S. Also available at Google Books.
Ford, Henry; Crowther, Samuel (1926). "Today and Tomorrow". Garden City, New York City: Doubleday, Page & Company. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Co-edition, 1926, London, William Heinemann. Various republications, including ISBN 0-915299-36-4.
Ford, Henry; Crowther, Samuel (1930). "Moving Forward". Garden City, New York City: Doubleday, Doran & Company, Inc. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Co-edition, 1931, London, William Heinemann.
Ford, Henry; Crowther, Samuel (1930). "Edison as I Know Him". New York: Cosmopolitan Book Corporation. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Apparent co-edition, 1930, as My Friend Mr. Edison, London, Ernest Benn. Republished as Edison as I Knew Him by American Thought and Action, San Diego, 1966, OCLC 3456201. Republished as Edison as I Know Him by Kessinger Publishing, LLC, 2007, ISBN 978-1-4325-6158-1.
Bennett, Harry; with Marcus, Paul (1951). We Never Called Him Henry. New York: Fawcett Publications. LCCN 51036122..
Sorensen, Charles E. (1956), My Forty Years with Ford, with Williamson, Samuel T., New York, New York, US: Norton, LCCN 56010854. Various republications, including ISBN 9780814332795.
Biographies
Bak, Richard (2003). Henry and Edsel: The Creation of the Ford Empire. Wiley ISBN 0-471-23487-7
Brinkley, Douglas G. Wheels for the World: Henry Ford, His Company, and a Century of Progress (2003)
Halberstam, David. "Citizen Ford" American Heritage 1986 37(6): 49 64. interpretive essay
Jardim, Anne. The First Henry Ford: A Study in Personality and Business Leadership Massachusetts Inst. of Technology Press 1970.
Lacey, Robert. Ford: The Men and the Machine Little, Brown, 1986. popular biography
Lewis, David I. (1976). The Public Image of Henry Ford: An American Folk Hero and His Company. Wayne State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8143-1553-8.
Nevins, Allan; Frank Ernest Hill (1954). Ford: The Times, The Man, The Company. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. ACLS e-book; also online free
Nevins, Allan; Frank Ernest Hill (1957). Ford: Expansion and Challenge, 1915 1933. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. ACLS e-book
Nevins, Allan; Frank Ernest Hill (1962). Ford: Decline and Rebirth, 1933 1962. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. ACLS e-book
Nye, David E. Henry Ford: "Ignorant Idealist." Kennikat, 1979.
Watts, Steven.  The People's Tycoon: Henry Ford and the American Century (2005)
Specialized studies
Baime, A.J. The Arsenal of Democracy: FDR, Detroit, and an Epic Quest to Arm an America at War (2014)
Barrow, Heather B. Henry Ford's Plan for the American Suburb: Dearborn and Detroit. DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press, 2015.
Batchelor, Ray. Henry Ford: Mass Production, Modernism and Design Manchester U. Press, 1994.
Bonin, Huber et al. Ford, 1902 2003: The European History 2 vol Paris 2003. ISBN 2-914369-06-9 scholarly essays in English; reviewed in Holden, Len. "Fording the Atlantic: Ford and Fordism in Europe" in Business History  Volume 47, #January 1, 2005 pp. 122 27
Brinkley, Douglas. "Prime Mover". American Heritage 2003 54(3): 44 53. on Model T
Bryan, Ford R. Henry's Lieutenants, 1993; ISBN 0-8143-2428-2
Bryan, Ford R. Beyond the Model T: The Other Ventures of Henry Ford Wayne State Press 1990.
Dempsey, Mary A. "Fordlandia," Michigan History 1994 78(4): 24 33. Ford's rubber plantation in Brazil
Denslow, William R. (2004) [1957]. 10,000 Famous Freemasons. Part. Vol. One, Volume 1, from A to J. Foreword by Harry S. Truman. (Paperback republication ed.). Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4179-7578-5.
Grandin, Greg. Fordlandia: The Rise and Fall of Henry Ford's Forgotten Jungle City. London, Icon, 2010. ISBN 978-1-84831-147-3
Hounshell, David A. (1984), From the American System to Mass Production, 1800 1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States, Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-2975-8, LCCN 83016269, OCLC 1104810110
Jacobson, D.S. "The Political Economy of Industrial Location: the Ford Motor Company at Cork 1912 26." Irish Economic and Social History 1977 4: 36 55. Ford and Irish politics
Kraft, Barbara S. The Peace Ship: Henry Ford's Pacifist Adventure in the First World War Macmillan, 1978
Levinson, William A. Henry Ford's Lean Vision: Enduring Principles from the First Ford Motor Plant, 2002; ISBN 1-56327-260-1
Lewis, David L. "Ford and Kahn" Michigan History 1980 64(5): 17 28. Ford commissioned architect Albert Kahn to design factories
Lewis, David L. "Henry Ford and His Magic Beanstalk" . Michigan History 1995 79(3): 10 17. Ford's interest in soybeans and plastics
Lewis, David L. "Working Side by Side" Michigan History 1993 77(1): 24 30. Why Ford hired large numbers of black workers
Link, Stefan J. Forging Global Fordism: Nazi Germany, Soviet Russia, and the Contest over the Industrial Order (2020) excerpt
McIntyre, Stephen L. "The Failure of Fordism: Reform of the Automobile Repair Industry, 1913 1940: Technology and Culture 2000 41(2): 269 99. repair shops rejected flat rates
Meyer, Stephen. The Five Dollar Day: Labor Management and Social Control in the Ford Motor Company, 1908 1921 (1981)
Nevins, Allan, and Frank Ernest Hill.  Ford: the Times the Man the Company (1954); Ford: Expansion and Challenge, 1915 1933 (1957); Ford: Decline and Rebirth, 1933 1962 (1963) comprehensive scholarly history
Nolan; Mary. Visions of Modernity: American Business and the Modernization of Germany (1994)
Daniel M. G. Raff and Lawrence H. Summers (October 1987). "Did Henry Ford Pay Efficiency Wages?" (PDF). Journal of Labor Economics. 5 (4): S57 S86. doi:10.1086/298165. S2CID 158557619.
Pietrykowski, Bruce. (1995). "Fordism at Ford: Spatial Decentralization and Labor Segmentation at the Ford Motor Company, 1920 1950". Economic Geography. 71 (4): 383 401. doi:10.2307/144424. JSTOR 144424.
Pool, James; Pool, Suzanne (1978), ""Chapter: Ford and Hitler"", Who Financed Hitler: The Secret Funding of Hitler's Rise to Power, 1919 1933, Dial Press, ISBN 978-0-7088-1756-8.
Roediger, David, ed "Americanism and Fordism American Style: Kate Richards O'hare's 'Has Henry Ford Made Good?'" Labor History 1988 29(2): 241 52. Socialist praise for Ford in 1916
Segal, Howard P. "'Little Plants in the Country': Henry Ford's Village Industries and the Beginning of Decentralized Technology in Modern America" Prospects 1988 13: 181 223. Ford created 19 rural workplaces as pastoral retreats
Tedlow, Richard S. "The Struggle for Dominance in the Automobile Market: the Early Years of Ford and General Motors" Business and Economic History 1988 17: 49 62. Ford stressed low price based on efficient factories but GM did better in oligopolistic competition by including investment in manufacturing, marketing, and management.
Thomas, Robert Paul. "The Automobile Industry and its Tycoon" Explorations in Entrepreneurial History 1969 6(2): 139 57. argues Ford did NOT have much influence on US industry,
Vald s, Dennis Nodin. "Perspiring Capitalists: Latinos and the Henry Ford Service School, 1918 1928" Aztl n 1981 12(2): 227 39. Ford brought hundreds of Mexicans in for training as managers
Wilkins, Mira and Frank Ernest Hill, American Business Abroad: Ford on Six Continents Wayne State University Press, 1964
Williams, Karel, Colin Haslam and John Williams, "Ford versus 'Fordism': The Beginning of Mass Production?" Work, Employment & Society, Vol. 6, No. 4, 517 55 (1992), stress on Ford's flexibility and commitment to continuous improvements
External links
 Media related to Henry Ford at Wikimedia Commons
 Quotations related to Henry Ford at Wikiquote
 Works by or about Henry Ford at Wikisource
Full text of My Life and Work from Project Gutenberg
Timeline
The Henry Ford Heritage Association
Henry Ford an American Experience documentary
Works by Henry Ford at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Henry Ford at Internet Archive
Works by Henry Ford at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Newspaper clippings about Henry Ford in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW
Business positions
Preceded byJohn S. Gray
 President of Ford Motor Company July 6, 1906   July 11, 1919
Succeeded byEdsel Ford
Preceded byEdsel Ford
 President of Ford Motor Company May 26, 1943   September 21, 1945
Succeeded byHenry Ford II
Party political offices
First
 Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Michigan(Class 2) 1918
Succeeded byMortimer Elwyn Cooley
vteHenry FordLife and history
Ford Motor Company
history
Ford Model T
The Dearborn Independent
Residences
Fair Lane
Edison and Ford Winter Estates
Family
Clara Bryant Ford (wife)
Edsel Ford (son)
Henry Ford II (grandson)
Josephine Clay Ford (granddaughter)
William Clay Ford Sr. (grandson)
Edsel Ford II (great-grandson)
Alfred Ford (great-grandson)
Sheila Ford Hamp (great-granddaughter)
William Clay Ford Jr. (great-grandson)
Elena Ford (great-granddaughter)
Other
Fordism
Car Entrepreneur of the Century
The Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village
 Commons
 Wikibooks
 Wikiquote
 Wikisource
vteFord Motor CompanyDivisions/MarquesCurrent
Ford
Lincoln
Discontinued
Comet (1960 61)
Continental (1956 59)
Edsel (1956 59)
Fordson (1917 64)
Frontenac (1960)
Mercury (1938 2011)
Merkur (1985 89)
Meteor (1949 76)
Monarch (1946 61)
Thames (1939 65)
SubsidiariesCurrent
Automotive Components Holdings
Changan Ford (China)
Australia
Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Credit
Europe
France
Germany
Ireland
Italia
Romania
United Kingdom
New Zealand
Ford Performance
Philippines
Quick Lane
Southern Africa
Spin
Former
Aston Martin
Chariot
Cosworth
Ford Aerospace
FPV
Ford India
Ford Japan
Ford Team RS
Hertz Corporation
Jaguar
Daimler Company
Kwik-Fit
Land Rover
New Holland Agriculture
Premier Automotive Group
Special Vehicle Operations
Special Vehicle Team
Th!nk
Troller
Visteon
Volvo
Joint ventures andshareholdingsCurrent
Argo AI (42%)
AutoAlliance International (50%)
AutoAlliance Thailand
Changan Ford (50%)
Ford Lio Ho
Ford Otosan (41%)
Ford Vietnam (60%)
Getrag Ford Transmissions (50%)
Jiangling Motors (32%)
Former
AutoLatina (Argentina/Brazil)
Automotive Fuel Cell Cooperation (49.9%)
Changan Ford Mazda (China)
Ford Sollers (Russia)
Ford Union (Belaurs)
Matford (France)
Samcor (South Africa)
Troller (Brazil)
Facilities andproducts
Ford World Headquarters
Detroit Corktown campus properties
Michigan Central Station
Roosevelt Warehouse
Engines
Factories
Motorcraft
Mercon
Platforms
Proving grounds
Transmissions
Vehicles
People
Designers
Ford Family
Henry Ford (Founder)
William Clay Ford Jr. (Executive Chairman)
Jim Farley (CEO)
List of CEOs
Other
Big Three
Dodge v. Ford Motor Co.
Grimshaw v. Ford Motor Co.
Fordl ndia
Ford Field
The Ford Show
Ford v Ferrari
History
Kinetic Design
New Edge
Pay on production
United States Council for Automotive Research
 Category
 Commons
vteSAE InternationalOrganizations
Association of Licensed Automobile Manufacturers
FISITA
Soci t  des ing nieurs de l'automobile
Standards
ARP4754
ARP4761
AS9000
AS9100
SAE J300
SAE J306
SAE J1587
SAE J1708
SAE J1772
SAE J1814
SAE J1939
SAE J2452
SAE J3016
SAE J3068
SAE J3105
Awards
Wright Brothers Medal
People
Andrew L. Riker
Henry Ford
Competitions
Baja SAE
Formula SAE
SAE Aerodesign
SAE Supermileage Competition
Related
Engineering Societies' Building
SAE steel grades
SAE 304
SAE 316
SAE 316L
SAE 440C
SAE 630
SAE 904L
vteTime 100: The Most Important People of the 20th CenturyLeaders & Revolutionaries
David Ben-Gurion
Winston Churchill
Mahatma Gandhi
Mikhail Gorbachev
Adolf Hitler
Ho Chi Minh
Pope John Paul II
Ruhollah Khomeini
Martin Luther King Jr.
Vladimir Lenin
Nelson Mandela
Mao Zedong
Ronald Reagan
Eleanor Roosevelt
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Margaret Sanger
Margaret Thatcher
Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel
Lech Wa sa
Artists & Entertainers
Louis Armstrong
Lucille Ball
The Beatles
Marlon Brando
Coco Chanel
Charlie Chaplin
Le Corbusier
Bob Dylan
Builders & Titans
Stephen Bechtel Sr.
Leo Burnett
Willis Carrier
Walt Disney
Henry Ford
Bill Gates
Amadeo Giannini
Ray Kroc
Est e Lauder
William Levitt
Lucky Luciano
Louis B. Mayer
Charles E. Merrill
Akio Morita
Walter Reuther
Pete Rozelle
David Sarnoff
Juan Trippe
Sam Walton
Thomas J. Watson Jr.
Scientists & Thinkers
Leo Baekeland
Tim Berners-Lee
Rachel Carson
Albert Einstein
Philo Farnsworth
Enrico Fermi
Alexander Fleming
Sigmund Freud
Robert H. Goddard
Kurt G del
Edwin Hubble
John Maynard Keynes
Leakey family
Jean Piaget
Jonas Salk
William Shockley
Alan Turing
Francis Crick & James Watson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Wright brothers
Heroes & Icons
Muhammad Ali
The American G.I.
Lady Diana Spencer
Anne Frank
Billy Graham
Che Guevara
Edmund Hillary & Tenzing Norgay
Helen Keller
Kennedy family
Bruce Lee
Charles Lindbergh
Harvey Milk
Marilyn Monroe
Emmeline Pankhurst
Rosa Parks
Pel 
Jackie Robinson
Andrei Sakharov
Mother Teresa
Bill W.
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
NARA
2
SNAC
IdRef
Portals: Biography Business and economics Cars Michigan
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_Ford&oldid=1149054597"