Designation earned by a person to assure qualification to perform a job or task
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this article, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (November 2015)
This article relies excessively on references to primary sources. Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Find sources: "Professional certification" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (November 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (August 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Professional certification, trade certification, or professional designation, often called simply certification or qualification, is a designation earned by a person to assure qualification to perform a job or task. Not all certifications that use post-nominal letters are an acknowledgement of educational achievement, or an agency appointed to safeguard the public interest.
Overview[edit]
A certification is a third-party attestation of an individual's level of knowledge or proficiency in a certain industry or profession. They are granted by authorities in the field, such as professional societies and universities, or by private certificate-granting agencies. Most certifications are time-limited; some expire after a period of time (e.g., the lifetime of a product that required certification for use), while others can be renewed indefinitely as long as certain requirements are met. Renewal usually requires ongoing education to remain up-to-date on advancements in the field, evidenced by earning the specified number of continuing education credits (CECs), or continuing education units (CEUs), from approved professional development courses.
Many certification programs are affiliated with professional associations, trade organizations, or private vendors interested in raising industry standards. Certificate programs are often created or endorsed by professional associations, but are typically completely independent from membership organizations. Certifications are very common in fields such as aviation, construction, technology, environment, and other industrial sectors, as well as healthcare, business, real estate, and finance.
According to The Guide to National Professional Certification Programs (1997) by Phillip Barnhart, "certifications are portable, since they do not depend on one company's definition of a certain job" and they provide potential employers with "an impartial, third-party endorsement of an individual's professional knowledge and experience".[1]
Certification is different from professional licensure. In the United States, licenses are typically issued by state agencies, whereas certifications are usually awarded by professional societies or educational institutes. Obtaining a certificate is voluntary in some fields, but in others, certification from a government-accredited agency may be legally required to perform certain jobs or tasks. In other countries, licenses are typically granted by professional societies or universities and require a certificate after about three to five years and so on thereafter. The assessment process for certification may be more comprehensive than that of licensure, though sometimes the assessment process is very similar or even the same, despite differing in terms of legal status.
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) defines the standard for being a certifying agency as meeting the following two requirements:
Delivering an assessment based on industry knowledge that is independent from training courses or course providers
Granting a time-limited credential to anyone who meets the assessment standards
The Institute for Credentialing Excellence (ICE) is a U.S.-based organization that sets standards for the accreditation of personnel certification and certificate programs based on the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing, a joint publication of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), the American Psychological Association (APA), and the National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME). Many members of the Association of Test Publishers (ATP) are also certification organizations.
Categorization[edit]
There are three general types of certification. Listed in order of development level and portability, they are: corporate (internal), product-specific, and profession-wide.
Corporate, or "internal" certifications, are made by a corporation or low-stakes organization for internal purposes. For example, a corporation might require a one-day training course for all sales personnel, after which they receive a certificate. While this certificate has limited portability   to other corporations, for example   it is the most simple to develop.
Product-specific certifications are more involved, and are intended to be referenced to a product across all applications. This approach is very prevalent in the information technology (IT) industry, where personnel are certified on a version of software or hardware. This type of certification is portable across locations (for example, different corporations that use that software), but not across other products. Another example could be the certifications issued for shipping personnel, which are under international standards even for the recognition of the certification body, under the International Maritime Organization (IMO).
The most general type of certification is profession-wide. Certification in the medical profession is often offered by particular specialties. In order to apply professional standards, increase the level of practice, and protect the public, a professional organization might establish a certification. This is intended to be portable to all places a certified professional might work. Of course, this generalization increases the cost of such a program; the process to establish a legally defensible assessment of an entire profession is very extensive. An example of this is a Certified Public Accountant (CPA), which would not be certified for just one corporation or one piece of accountancy software but for general work in the profession.
Professional certificates awarded by tertiary education providers[edit]
Many tertiary education providers grant professional certificates as an award for the completion of an educational program. The curriculum of a professional certificate is most often in a focused subject matter. Many professional certificates have the same curriculum as master's degrees in the same subject. Many other professional certificates offer the same courses as master's degrees in the same subject, but require the student to take fewer total courses to complete the program. Some professional certificates have a curriculum that more closely resembles a baccalaureate major in the same field.  The typical professional certificate program is between 200 and 300 class-hours in size. It is uncommon for a program to be larger or smaller than that. Most professional certificate programs are open enrollment, but some have admissions processes. A few universities put some of their professional certificates into a subclass they refer to as advanced professional certificates.
Some of the more commonly offered professional certificates include:
Professional Certificate in Accounting (PCA)
Professional Certificate in Accounting and Finance (PCAF)
Professional Certificate in Taxation (PCIT)
Professional Certificate in Transfer Pricing (PCITP)
Professional Certificate in Contract Management (PCCM)
Professional Certificate in Customer Relationship Management (PCCRM)
Professional Certificate in Facility Management (PCFM)
Professional Certificate in Financial Planning (PCFP)
Professional Certificate in Graphic Design (PCGD)
Professional Certificate in Small Business Management (PCSBM)
Professional Certificate in Human Resources (PCHR)
Professional Certificate in Marketing (PCM)
Professional Certificate in Digital Marketing (PCDM)
Professional Certificate in Paralegal Studies (PCPS)
Professional Certificate in Project Management (PCPM)
Professional Certificate in Supply Chain Management (PCSCM)
Professional Certificate in Store Management (PCSM)
Professional Certificate in Materials Management (PCMM)
Professional Certificate in Technical Communication (PCTC)
Advanced professional certificate[edit]
Advanced professional certificates are professional credentials designed to help professionals enhance their job performance and marketability in their respective fields. In many other countries, certificates are qualifications in higher education. In the United States, a certificate may be offered by an institute of higher education. These certificates usually signify that a student has reached a standard of knowledge of a certain vocational subject. Certificate programs can be completed more quickly than associate degrees and often do not have general education requirements.
An advanced professional certificate is a result of an educational process designed for individuals. Certificates are designed for both newcomers to the industry as well as seasoned professionals. Certificates are awarded by an educational program or academic institution. Completion of a certificate program indicates completion of a course or series of courses with a specific concentration that is different from an educational degree program. Course content for an advanced certificate is set forth through a variety of sources i.e. faculty, committee, instructors, and other subject matter experts in a related field. The end goal of an advanced professional certificate is so that professionals may demonstrate knowledge of course content at the end of a set period in time.
Areas of certification[edit]
Accountancy, auditing and finance[edit]
See also: Professional certification in financial services
There are many professional bodies for accountants and auditors throughout the world; some of them are legally recognized in their jurisdictions.
Public accountants are the accountancy and control experts that are legally certified in different jurisdictions to work in public practices, certifying accounts as statutory auditors, eventually selling advice and services to other individuals and businesses. Today, however, many work within private corporations, financial industry, and government bodies.
Accounting and external auditing[edit]
Cf. Accountancy qualifications and regulation
CPA (Chartered Professional Accountant), the unified accounting designation in Canada conferred by CPA Canada.
CA or Chartered Accountant conferred by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
Institute of Chartered Accountants within the Commonwealth e.g. Australia and New Zealand, South Africa, Canada (before merger into CPA).  With mutual recognition with each other and with the UK
ACA, FCA or CA (Chartered Accountant) conferred by Institutes of Chartered Accountants in various territories, namely the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
ACMA or FCMA (Associate or Fellow Chartered Management Accountant) conferred by the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (UK)
Associate or Fellow Chartered Certified Accountant (ACCA or FCCA) conferred by Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (UK)
AFA or FFA (Associate or Fellow Incorporated Financial Accountant) conferred by the Institute of Financial Accountants (UK)
AAIA or FAIA (Associate or Fellow International Accountant) conferred by Association of International Accountants
MIPA or FIPA (Member or Fellow of the Institute of Public Accountants who use the designation "Public Accountant") conferred by the Institute of Public Accountants (Australia)
CPA (Certified Public Accountant) conferred by State Accountancy Boards in the US, Hong-Kong, Canada ...
CMA (Certified Management Accountant) conferred by Institute of Certified Management Accountants (ICMA in Australia), Institute of Management Accountants (IMA in US)
CCC (Chartered Cost Controllers) issued and conferred by the American Academy of Financial Management USA Certifying Board (AAFM)[2]
CFS (Certified Finance Specialist) conferred by IQN
Internal auditing and fraud combat[edit]
cAAP (Certified Agile Auditor Professional) awarded by cRisk Academy for proficiency in Agile Auditing
cCAE (Certified Chief Audit Executive) awarded by cRisk Academy for proficiency in starting and running an Internal Audit department
cORCM (Certification in Objective-Centric Risk and Certainty Management) awarded by cRisk Academy
cPIA (Certified Practitioner in Internal Audit) awarded by cRisk Academy for proficiency in Internal Auditing
cRBIA (Certified Risk-Based Internal Auditor) awarded by cRisk Academy for proficiency in Risk-Based Internal Auditing
CIA (Certified Internal Auditor): CCSA, Certification in Control Self Assessment; CGAP, Certified Government Auditing Professional; CRMA, Certification in Risk Management Assurance; QIAL, Qualification in Internal Audit Leadership, conferred by the internationally recognized Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) headquartered in Lake Mary, Florida, with chapters in many countries
CFE (Certified Fraud Examiner) conferred by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE) headquartered in Texas with chapters in many countries
CFF (Certified in Financial Forensics) awarded by the American Institute of CPAs
CISA (Certified Information Systems Auditor) awarded by the Information Systems Audit and Control Association headquartered in the US with chapters in many countries
CAMS (Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialist) offered by Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS) and advanced CAMS
CGSS (Certified Global Sanctions Specialist) conferred by Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS)
CSA (Certified Strategic Auditor) conferred by Association of Certified Strategic Auditors (ACSA) https://www.acsaglobal.com
IACCP (Investment Adviser Certified Compliance Professional) conferred by the Investment Adviser Association (IAA) and National Regulatory Services (NRS)
CPERM (Certified Professional in Enterprise Risk Management) conferred by the Academy of Professional Certification Company (APC) which endorsed by HKSARG
Finance[edit]
CFS (Certified Finance Specialist) conferred by IQN
CFA (Chartered Financial Analyst) conferred by CFA Institute (CFA)
ChFM Chartered Financial Manager [3] conferred by International Board of Standards
CIIA (Certified International Investment Analyst) conferred by the Association of Certified International Investment Analysts (ACIIA)
IACCP (Investment Adviser Certified Compliance Professional) conferred by the Investment Adviser Association (IAA) and National Regulatory Services (NRS)
Investments[edit]
CFS (Certified Finance Specialist) conferred by IQN
CFA (Chartered Financial Analyst) conferred by CFA Institute (CFA)
ChFM Chartered Financial Manager [3] conferred by International Board of Standards
CIPM (Certificate in Investment Performance Measurement) conferred by CFA Institute (CFA)
CIIA (Certified International Investment Analyst) conferred by the Association of Certified International Investment Analysts (ACIIA)
ASA (Accredited Senior Appraiser), AM (Accredited Member), and CEIV (Certified in Entity and Intangible Valuations) conferred by the American Society of Appraisers
CBV (Chartered Business Valuator) conferred by the CBV Institute.
CVA (Certified Valuation Analyst) conferred by the NACVA.
CAIA (Chartered Alternative Investment Analyst) conferred by the CAIA Association
IACCP (Investment Adviser Certified Compliance Professional) conferred by the Investment Adviser Association (IAA) and National Regulatory Services (NRS)
FRM (Financial Risk Manager) conferred by Global Association of Risk Professionals (GARP)
PRM (Professional Risk Manager) conferred by Professional Risk Managers' International Association (PRMIA)[4]
FMVA (Financial Modeling and Valuation Analyst) conferred by Corporate Finance Institute (CFI).
CQF (Certificate in Quantitative Finance), conferred by the CQF Institute [5]
Payroll[edit]
CPP (Certified Payroll Professional) and FPC (Fundamental Payroll Specialist) conferred by the American Payroll Association.
Payroll Compliance Practitioner (PCP) and Certified Payroll Manager (CPM) conferred by the National Payroll Institute
Personal finance[edit]
CFS (Certified Finance Specialist) conferred by IQN
CFA (Chartered Financial Analyst) conferred by CFA Institute (CFA)
ChFM Chartered Financial Manager [3] conferred by International Board of Standards
CFP (Certified Financial Planner) conferred by Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards and Financial Planning Standards Board
CCP (Certified Credit Professional) issued to credit management professionals in Canada by the Credit Institute of Canada
EA (Enrolled Agent) by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
CFC (Certified Financial Consultant) conferred by the Institute of Financial Consultants
Public finance[edit]
CCMT (Certified California Municipal Treasurer) conferred by California Municipal Treasurers Association (CMTA)
CGAP (Certified Government Auditing Professional) conferred by the Institute of Internal Auditors, based on the US Government Auditing Standards (Yellow Book) and additionally on COSO, IIA standards and INTOSAI ISSAI standards recognized worldwide in public finance
CDFM (Certified Defense Financial Manager) conferred by American Society of Military Comptrollers (ASMC)
CFO (Certified Financial Officer) conferred by the Carl Vinson Institute of Government of the University of Georgia
CGFM (Certified Government Financial Manager) conferred by Association of Government Accountants (AGA)
CGAT (Certified Governmental Accounting Technician), conferred by Government Finance Officers Association of Alabama[6]
CGFO (Certified Government Finance Officer) conferred by Government Finance Officers Association of Texas (GFOAT)
CGFO (Certified Government Finance Officer[7]), conferred by Florida Government Finance Officers Association[8] (FGFOA)
CGFO (Certified Government Finance Officer[9]) conferred by Louisiana Government Finance Officers Association[10]
CMFO (Certified Municipal Finance Officer[11]) conferred by Government Finance Officers of New Jersey,[12] Rutgers University, and the State of New Jersey
CMFO (Certified Municipal Finance Officer[13]) conferred by Tennessee Comptroller of the Treasury[14] and the Municipal Technical Advisory Service
CPFO (Certified Public Finance Officer) conferred by Government Finance Officers Association
CPFA (Certified Public Finance Administrator) conferred by Association of Public Treasurers of the United States and Canada (APTUSC)
GFO (Government Finance Officer[15]) conferred by Government Finance Officers Association of South Carolina[16] (GFOASC)
North Carolina Local Governmental Finance Officer[17] conferred by North Carolina Government Finance Officers Association[18] and the North Carolina Association of County Finance Officers
Aging services[edit]
Certified Aging in Place Specialist (CAPS)
Certified Daily Money Managers
Certified Elder Law
Certified Living in Place (CLIPP)
Certified Senior Advisor (CSA)
Certified At-risk Adult Crime Tactics Specialist (CACTS)
Cognitive Care Certification (CCC)
Architecture[edit]
AIA (Member, American Institute of Architects) conferred by American Institute of Architects
FAIA (Fellow, American Institute of Architects) conferred by American Institute of Architects
RA (Registered Architect) conferred by National Council of Architecture Registration Boards
NCARB (Certified) issued by National Council of Architecture Registration Boards   this allows for state-state reciprocity.
Archival science, information privacy, and records management[edit]
CA (Certified Archivist), conferred by Academy of Certified Archivists
CIP (Certified Information Professional) conferred by AIIM
CIPM (Certified Information Privacy Manager) conferred by International Association of Privacy Professionals
CIPP (Certified Information Privacy Professional) conferred by International Association of Privacy Professionals
CIPT (Certified Information Privacy Technologist) conferred by International Association of Privacy Professionals
CRA (Certified Records Analyst) conferred by Institute of Certified Records Managers
CRM (Certified Records Manager) conferred by Institute of Certified Records Managers
IGP (Information Governance Professional) conferred by ARMA International
Aviation[edit]
Aviators are certified through theoretical and in-flight examinations. Requirements for certifications are quite equal in most countries and are regulated by each National Aviation Authority. The existing certificates or pilot licenses are:
SPL (Sport Pilot License) conferred by the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration)
PPL (Private Pilot License) conferred by the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) or JAA (Joint Aviation Authorities)
CPL (Commercial Pilot Licence) conferred by the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) or JAA (Joint Aviation Authorities)
ATP (Airline Transport Pilot) conferred by the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) or JAA (Joint Aviation Authorities)
Licensing in these categories require not only examinations but also a minimum number of flight hours. All categories are available for Fixed-Wing Aircraft (airplanes) and Rotatory-Wing Aircraft (helicopters). Within each category, aviators may also obtain certifications in:
Instrument Flight Rules (IFR)
Multi-engine aircraft
Turbojet Engines
Jet Engines
Experimental aircraft
Amphibious aircraft
Seaplanes
Usually, aviators must be certified also in their log books for the type and model of aircraft they are allowed to fly. Currency checks as well as regular medical check-ups with a frequency of 6 months, 12 months, or 36 months, depending on the type of flying permitted, are obligatory. An aviator can fly only if holding:
A valid pilot license
A valid medical certificate
Valid certifications for the type of aircraft and type of flight.
In Europe, the ANSP, ATCO & ANSP technicians are certified according to EUROCONTROL Safety Regulatory Requirement (ESARRs) (according to EU regulation 2096/2005 "Common Requirements").
Biomedical[edit]
BMD (Biomedical Electronics Technician) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
BIET (Biomedical Imaging Electronics Technician) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
Business[edit]
CSA (Certified Strategic Auditor) conferred by Association of Certified Strategic Auditors (ACSA)
CSM (Certified Strategic Manager) conferred by IQN
CPSM (Certified Professional in Supply Management) conferred by Institute for Supply Management (ISM)
CPSD (Certified Professional in Supplier Diversity) conferred by Institute for Supply Management (ISM)
Chiropractic[edit]
Main article: List of chiropractic credentials
Communications[edit]
In the United States, several communications certifications are conferred by the Electronics Technicians Association.
Computer technology[edit]
Main article: Professional certification (computer technology)
Certification is often used in the professions of software engineering and information technology.
CITP (Chartered IT Professional) conferred by British Computer Society, The Institution of Engineering and Technology and by other professional engineering institutions in the UK and commonwealth
Contract management[edit]
Main article: Contract management
  CPCM (Certified Professional Contract Manager) conferred by the National Contract Management Association.
  CPM (Commercial Project Manager) conferred by Commercial Officers Group.
  CPSM (Certified Professional in Supply Management) conferred by Institute for Supply Management (ISM)
Dance[edit]
Conferred by the International Dance Council CID[19] at UNESCO, the International Certification of Dance Studies[20] is awarded to students who have completed 150 hours of classes in a specific form of dance for Level 1. Another 150 hours are required for Level 2 and so on till Level 10. This is the only international certification for dance since the International Dance Council CID[19] is the official body for all forms of dance; it is usually given in addition to local or national certificates, that is why it is colloquially called "the dancer's passport". Students cannot apply for this certification directly   they have to ask their school to apply on their behalf. This certification is awarded free of charge, there is no cost other than membership fees.
International Dance Council CID[19] at UNESCO administers the International Certification of Dance Studies.
Data management[edit]
Business Intelligence and Data Analyst (BIDA) by Corporate Finance Institute (CFI).
Certified Data Management Professional (CDMP) by DAMA International.[21]
Dentistry[edit]
Main article: Dentistry  Education_and_licensing
Electronics[edit]
In the United States, several electronics certifications are provided by the Electronics Technicians Association.
Emergency management[edit]
See also: Emergency Management Institute
The Federal Emergency Management Agency's EMI offers credentials and training opportunities for United States citizens. Students do not have to be employed by FEMA or be federal employees for some of the programs.[22]
Advance Professional Series (APS) Credential
Continuity Excellence Series, Level I and II
Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience
Disaster Field Training Operations (DFTO)
Emergency Management Professional Program (EMPP)
Executive Fire Officer Program (EFOP)[23]
Integrated Emergency Management Courses (IEMC)
Master Exercise Practitioner Program (MEPP)
Master Trainer Program (MTP)
Professional Development Series (PDS) Credential
Virtual Table Top Exercise (VTTX) Series
Engineering[edit]
See also: Regulation and licensure in engineering
Professional engineering is any act of planning, designing, composing, measuring, evaluating, inspecting, advising, reporting, directing or supervising, or managing any of the foregoing, that requires the application of engineering principles and that concerns the safeguarding of life, health, property, economic interests, the public interest or the environment.
P.Eng. (Professional Engineer), conferred by provincial licensing bodies in Canada.
Ir. or P.Eng. (Professional Engineer), conferred by Board of Engineers Malaysia (BEM) in Malaysia.
PE (Professional Engineer), conferred by Pakistan Engineering Council (PEC) and state licensing bodies in the United States.
PE (Power Engineer), conferred by provincial safety authorities in Canada.
EUR ING (European Engineer), conferred by the European Federation of National Engineering Associations (FEANI).
C.Eng. (Chartered Engineer), conferred by professional engineering institutions in the UK and commonwealth.
SMIEEE (Senior member of the IEEE), a professional designation throughout all of the United States.
CET (Certified Engineering Technologist) or AScT (Applied Science Technologist), conferred by provincial licensing bodies in Canada.
SPE Society of Petroleum Engineers Certificate Is a program whereby it certifies the technical knowledge of petroleum engineers. The certification is granted based on an examination in conjunction with experience of the applicant.
Event planning[edit]
Event planning includes budgeting, scheduling, site selection, acquiring necessary permits, coordinating transportation and parking, arranging for speakers or entertainers, arranging decor, event security, catering, coordinating with third-party vendors, and emergency plans.
Common event planning certifications include:
CMP: Certified Meeting Professional
CSEP: Certified Special Events Professional
CPCE: Certified Professional in Catering and Events
CGMP: Certified Government Meeting Professional
CWEP: Certified Wedding & Event Planner
Facility management[edit]
Facility management can be defined as an aspect of engineering management science that deals with the planning, designing, coordination of space and maintenance of a built environment to enhance quality service management system. Service Quality System includes activities like security, maintenance, catering, and external as well as internal cleaning. In general, it is also the coordination and harmonization of various specialist disciplines to create the best possible working environment for staff.
Facility management is an interdisciplinary field devoted to the coordination of space, infrastructure, people and organization, often associated with the administration of office blocks, arenas, schools, convention centers, shopping complexes, hospitals, hotels, etc. However, FM facilitates on a wider range of activities than just business services and these are referred to as non-core functions.
FMP- Facility Management Professional
CFM- Certified Facility Manager
SFP- Sustainability Facility Professional[citation needed]
Warehousing management[edit]
A warehouse management system (WMS) is a part of the supply chain and primarily aims to control the movement and storage of materials within a warehouse and process the associated transactions, including shipping, receiving, putaway and picking. The systems also direct and optimize stock putaway based on real-time information about the status of bin utilization. A WMS monitors the progress of products through the warehouse. It involves the physical warehouse infrastructure, tracking systems, and communication between product stations.[24]
More precisely, warehouse management involves the receipt, storage and movement of goods, (normally finished goods), to intermediate storage locations or to a final customer. In the multi-echelon model for distribution, there may be multiple levels of warehouses. This includes a central warehouse, a regional warehouses (serviced by the central warehouse) and potentially retail warehouses (serviced by the regional warehouses).[25]
Environment[edit]
CEnvP   Certified Environmental Practitioner of Australia and New Zealand (CEnvP)
Chartered Environmentalist (CEnv), Society for the Environment (UK)
MIEMA - Full Member of the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA)
FIEMA - Fellow of the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA)
Environmental health[edit]
CPHI(C)   Certified Public Health Inspector (Canada)
Explosive atmospheres[edit]
IECEx[26] covers the specialized field of explosion protection associated with the use of equipment in areas where flammable gases, liquids and combustible dusts may be present. This system provides the assurance that equipment is manufactured to meet safety standards, and that services such as installation, repair and overhaul also comply with IEC International Standards on 60079 series. The UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe), cited IECEx as one example of a practice model for the verification of conformity to IEC Standards, for European smaller countries with no certification schemes for such equipment. It published a "Common Regulatory Framework" as a suggestion for those countries implementing a certification program for the explosive atmospheres' segment.[27]
Fiber optics and data cabling[edit]
RCDD (Registered Communications Distribution Designer) by BICSI
DCI (Data Cabling Installer) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
FOI (Fiber Optics Installer) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
FOT (Fiber Optics Technician) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
FOT-OSP (Fiber Optics Technician-Outside Plant) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
FOD (Fiber Optics Designer) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
TTT (Termination and Testing Technician) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
Genealogy[edit]
AG (Accredited Genealogist) conferred by the International Commission for the Accreditation of Professional Genealogists (ICAPGen).
CG (Certified Genealogist) conferred by the Board for Certification of Genealogists (BCG).
CGL (Certified Genealogical Lecturer) conferred by the Board for Certification of Genealogists (BCG).
Health leadership[edit]
CHE (Certified Health Executive) conferred by the Canadian College of Health Leaders (CCHL)
Human Resources[edit]
aPHR (Associate Professional in Human Resources) conferred by the Human Resources Certification Institute
PHR (Professional in Human Resources) conferred by the Human Resources Certification Institute
SPHR (Senior Professional in Human Resources) conferred by the Human Resources Certification Institute
SHRM-CP (Society for Human Resources Management   Certified Professional) conferred by the Society for Human Resources Management
SHRM-SCP (Society for Human Resources Management   Senior Certified Professional) conferred by the Society for Human Resources Management
Hospitality and tourism[edit]
CHA (Certified Hotel Administrator) conferred by American Hotel & Lodging Association
CMP (Certified Meeting Professional) conferred by Convention Industry Council
CEM (Certified in Exhibition Management) conferred by International Association of Exhibitions and Events[28]
Insurance and risk management[edit]
In the United States, insurance professionals are licensed separately by each state. Many individuals seek one or more certifications to distinguish themselves from their peers.
American College of Financial Services:
Chartered Life Underwriter (CLU)
Chartered Financial Consultant (ChFC)
American Institute For Chartered Property Casualty Underwriters (The Institutes):
Chartered Property Casualty Underwriter (CPCU )
Associate in Risk Management (ARM)
National Alliance for Insurance Education & Research administers the Certified Insurance Counselor (CIC)
Professional Liability Underwriting Society (PLUS) administers Registered Professional Liability Underwriter (RPLU).[citation needed]
American Educational Institute (AEI)
Accredited Claims Adjuster	(ACA)
Accredited Claims Professional	(ACP)
Accredited Claims Professional Candidate	(ACAc)
Associate in Claims	(AIC)
Applied Microbial Remediation Technician	AMRC
Casualty General Adjuster	(CGA)
Certified Claims Adjuster	(CCA)
Certified Claims Professional	(CCP)
Certified Claims Professional Candidate	(CCPc)
Chartered Property Casualty Underwriter candidate	(CPCUc)
Certied Forensic Litigation Consultant	(CFLC)
Certified General Adjuster	(CrtGA)
Certified Mold Specialist	(CMS)
Certified Mold Inspector	(CMI)
Certified Property Appraiser and Umpire	(CPAU)
Certified Property Loss Appraiser	(CPLA)
Certified Property Loss Umpire	(CPLU)
Casualty General Adjuster	(CGA)
Certified General Adjuster	(CrtGA)
Casualty General Adjuster	(CGA)
Executive General Adjuster	(EGA)
Fire & Smoke Restoration Technician	(FSRT)
GrandMaster General Adjuster	(GMGA)
HAAG Engineering Certified Roofing Inspector Residential/Commercial	(HCI-R/C)
Insurance Claims Expert	(ICE)
Legal Principles Claims Specialist	(LPCS)
Master General Adjuster	(MGA)
Master Public Adjuster	(MPA)
Property Claims Law Associate	(PCLA)
Property General Adjuster	(PGA)
Registered General Adjuster	(RGA)
Senior Professional Public Adjuster (SPPA)
Universal Claims Certification	(UCC)
Windstorm Insurance Network Professional	(WIND-P)
Water Remediaton Technician	(WRT)
Language education[edit]
TESOL is a large field of employment with widely varying degrees of regulation. Most provision worldwide is through the state school system of each individual country, and as such, the instructors tend to be trained primary- or secondary school teachers who are native speakers of the language of their pupils, and not of English. Though native speakers of English have been working in non-English speaking countries in this capacity for years, it was not until the last twenty-five years or so that there was any widespread focus on training particularly for this field. Previously, workers in this sort of job were people engaging in backpacker tourism hoping to earn some extra travel money or well-educated professionals in other fields volunteering, or retired people. These sort of people are certainly still to be found, but there are many who consider TESOL their main profession.
One of the problems[according to whom?] facing these full-time teachers is the absence of an international governing body for the certification or licensure of English language teachers. However, Cambridge University and its subsidiary body UCLES are pioneers in trying to get some degree of accountability and quality control to consumers of English courses, through their CELTA and DELTA programs. Trinity College London has equivalent programs, the CertTESOL and the LTCL DipTESOL. They offer initial certificates in teaching, in which candidates are trained in language awareness and classroom techniques, and given a chance to practice teaching, after which feedback is reported. Both institutions have as a follow-up a professional diploma, usually taken after a year or two in the field. Although the initial certificate is available to anyone with a high school education, the diploma is meant to be a post-graduate qualification and can in fact be incorporated into a master's degree program.
Legal affairs[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
An increasing number of attorneys are choosing to be recognized as having special expertise in certain fields of law. According to the American Bar Association, a lawyer who is a certified specialist has been recognized by an independent professional certifying organization as having an enhanced level of skill and expertise, as well as substantial involvement in an established legal specialty. These organizations require a lawyer to demonstrate special training, experience and knowledge to ensure that the lawyer's recognition is meaningful and reliable. Lawyer conduct with regard to specialty certification is regulated by the states.
Legal administrators vary in their day-to-day responsibilities and job requirements. The Association of Legal Administrators (ALA) is the credentialing body of the Certified Legal Manager (CLM) certification program.[29] CLMs are recognized as administrators who have passed a comprehensive examination and have met other eligibility requirements.:[30]
Librarians[edit]
In Australia, ALIA (Australian Library and Information Association) certifies librarians and library technicians. Distinguished librarians who have completed a high level of professional learning are awarded the Distinguished Certified Professional Award. Prior to 2013, this award was known as Associate Fellows.
In New Zealand, the accrediting body is LIANZA (Library and Information Association of New Zealand Aotearoa Te Rau Herenga O Aotearoa). LIANZA accredit prominent librarians at three levels, Fellows, Life Members and Associates.
Logistics and transport[edit]
Logistician is the profession in the logistics and transport sectors, including sea, air, land and rail modes. Professional qualification for logisticians usually carries post-nominal letters.
Certification granting bodies include, but are not limited to, Institute for Supply Management (ISM), Association for Operations Management (APICS), Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport (CILT), International Society of Logistics (SOLE), Canadian Institute of Traffic and Transportation (CITT), and Allied Council for Commerce and Logistics (ACCL).
Management Consulting[edit]
Management consulting is the practice of providing consulting services to organizations to improve their performance or in any way to assist in achieving any sort of organizational objectives.
The profession's primary certification is the "Certified Management Consultant[31]" (CMC) designation.
Certification granting bodies are the approximately 50 Institutes of Management Consulting belonging to the International Council of Management Consulting Institutes (ICMCI).[32]
Marketing[edit]
CDMP (Certified Digital Marketing Professional), conferred by Digital Marketing Institute.
CME (Certified Marketing Executive), conferred by Sales & Marketing Executives International, Inc..
CyQUal (Cyber qualification), The Digital Degree Accredited certification offered by FreeUniversityOnline.com
Social Media Marketing Certification, Digital Marketing Master Certification, SEO Certification, conferred by Boot Camp Digital
Ministers[edit]
Churches have their own process of who may use various religious titles. Protestant churches typically require a Masters of Divinity, accreditation by the denomination and ordination by the local church in order for a minister to become a "Reverend". Those qualifications may or may not also give government authorization to solemnize marriages.
Medicine[edit]
Main article: Medical credentials
Board certification is the process by which a physician in the United States documents by written, practical or computer based testing, illustrating a mastery of knowledge and skills that define a particular area of medical specialization. The American Board of Medical Specialties, a not-for-profit organization, assists 24 approved medical specialty boards in the development and use of standards in the ongoing evaluation and certification of physicians.
Medical specialty certification in the United States is a voluntary process. While medical licensure sets the minimum competency requirements to diagnose and treat patients, it is not specialty specific.[33] Board certification demonstrates a physician's exceptional expertise in a particular specialty or sub-specialty of medical practice.
Patients, physicians, health care providers, insurers and quality organizations regard certification as an important measure of a physician's knowledge, experience and skills to provide quality health care within a given specialty.
Other professional certifications include certifications such as medical licenses, Membership of the Royal College of Physicians, Fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, nursing board certification, diplomas in social work. The Commission for Certification in Geriatric Pharmacy certifies pharmacists that are knowledgeable about principles of geriatric pharmacotherapy and the provision of pharmaceutical care to the elderly. Additional certifying bodies relating to the medical field include:
Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists
American College of Emergency Physicians
Royal Australasian College of Physicians
Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons
Membership of the College of Emergency Medicine
Joint Commission on Allied Health Personnel in Ophthalmology
American Registry for Diagnostic Medical Sonography
Medical coding and billing[edit]
AHIMA (American Health Information Management Association)[34]
AAPC[35]
Medical Association of Billers[36]
Peer support[edit]
NCPRP stands for "National Certified Peer Recovery Professional", and the NCPRP credential and exam were developed in collaboration with the International Certification Board of Recovery Professionals (ICBRP) and is currently being administered by PARfessionals.
PARfessionals is a professional organization and all of the available courses are professional development and pre-certification courses.
The NCPRP credential and exam focus primarily on the concept of peer recovery through mental health and addiction recovery. It has the main purpose of training student-candidates on how to become peer recovery professionals who can provide guidance, knowledge or assistance for individuals who have had similar experiences.[37]
Each student-candidate must complete several key steps which include initial registration; the pre-certification review course; and all applicable sections of the official application in order to become eligible to complete the final step, which is the NCPRP certification exam.[38]
The NCPRP credential is obtained once a participant successfully passes the NCPRP certification exam by the second attempt and is valid for five years.[39]
Physical asset management[edit]
CMRP   Certified Maintenance and Reliability Professional (CMRP)[40]
MMP   Maintenance Management Professional[41]
Pilates[edit]
PMA(R) CPT
Plumbing[edit]
ASSE (American Society of Sanitary Engineering)[42]   an ANSI Accredited standards developer and certification body
Project management[edit]
Organizations that offer various certifications include:
American Academy of Project Management
Project Management Institute
Stanford University through the Stanford Advanced Project Management Certificate Program
CPMA (Certified Project Management Analyst) conferred by IQN
Association for Project Management
IPMA (International Project Management Association)
Commercial Project Manager through Commercial Officers Group
Public health[edit]
National Board of Public Health Examiners, www.nbphe.org
Public relations[edit]
In the US, the Universal Accreditation Board, an organization composed of the Public Relations Society of America, the Agricultural Relations Council, the National School Public Relations Association, the Religious Communicators Council and other public relations professional societies, administers the Accreditation in Public Relations (APR), a voluntary certification program for public relations practitioners.
Public Participation[edit]
The Certified Public Participation Professional (CP3) and Master Certified Public Participation Professional (MCP3) are awarded by two regions of the International Association for Public Participation (IAP2) Archived 17 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine: IAP2 Canada[43] and IAP2 USA.[44] As of 2019, only 25 individuals had achieved either of these distinctions. The CP3 designation is awarded upon successfully completing a three-step process that includes a written application documenting the individual's experience in the profession, a written response to a case study, and an in-person oral assessment.
Individuals seeking certification are assessed against 5 Core Competencies, which are the essential capabilities for a professional in this field to effectively design, implement, and evaluate public participation programs. The competencies emerged from qualitative analysis of a comprehensive list of knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, skills, behaviors, and capabilities identified in June 2014 by more than 100 P2 professionals from around the world. The descriptions and quality standards for each competency were developed, tested, and refined through an iterative process involving IAP2 members. Each competency is further divided into individual criteria. An individual must meet or exceed every criterion to achieve the CP3 designation. IAP2 USA's program includes 29 criteria.[45] IAP2 Canada's program includes 31 criteria;[46] the two additional criteria in Canada address federal requirements for indigenous engagement. The MCP3 designation recognizes additional specialization and expertise and is assessed through a written application available only to individuals who have already achieved the CP3 designation.
To maintain professional certification, individuals must maintain active membership in IAP2, provide a minimum of 20 hours (annually) of volunteer (unpaid) service to IAP2, and participate in a minimum of 12 hours (annually) of continued professional development.
Real estate management[edit]
The Building Owners and Managers Association  and the International Facility Management Association offer professional certifications for the operation and management of commercial properties.[47][48]
Renewable energy[edit]
PVIP (PV Installation Professional) conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners[49]
PVDS (PV Design Specialist) conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
PVIS (PV Installation Specialist) conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
PVCMS (PV Commissioning & Maintenance Specialist) conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
PVSI (PV System Inspector) conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
PVTS (PV Technical Sales) conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
SHI (Solar Heating Installer) conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
SHSI (Solar Heating System Inspector conferred by North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
EVT (Electronic Vehicle Technician) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
PVI (Photovoltaic Installer) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
SWI (Small Wind Installer) conferred by Electronics Technicians Association
Safety and Occupational Hygiene[edit]
Certified Safety Professional offered by the Board of Certified Safety Professionals
Certified Industrial Hygienist
Certified Safety Specialist
Sales[edit]
Organizations offering certification include:
Sales & Marketing Executives International
Canadian Professional Sales Association
Security[edit]
ASIS International administers the Certified Protection Professional   Board-Certified in Security Management (CPP)
ASIS International administers the Physical Security Professional, Board-Certified (PSP)
ASIS International administers the Professional Certified Investigator, Board-Certified (PCI)
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners administers the Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE)
International Foundation of Protection Officers administers the Certified Protection Officer (CPO)
Society of Payment Security Professionals (SPSP) administers the Certified Payment-Card Industry Security Manager
Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) from ISC2.org
National Sheriffs' Association administers the Certified Homeland Protection Professional (CHPP) Certification
Associated Locksmiths of America administers the Registered Locksmith (RL) Certification
Associated Locksmiths of America administers the Certified Registered Locksmith (CRL) Certification
Associated Locksmiths of America administers the Certified Professional Locksmith (CPL) Certification
Associated Locksmiths of America administers the Certified Master Locksmith (CML) Certification
Associated Locksmiths of America administers the Certified Professional Safe Technician (CPS) Certification
Associated Locksmiths of America administers the Certified Master Safe Technician (CMST) Certification
Security Industry Association administers the Certified Security Project Manager (CSPM) Certification
Speaking[edit]
Conferred by the National Speakers Association, the Certified Speaking Professional (CSP)[50] is the speaking profession's international measure of professional platform competence. This certification is awarded by the National Speakers Association.[51] Only about 10% of the speakers who belong to the Global Speakers Federation (GSF) hold this designation.[citation needed] Those who have earned their certification have done so by demonstrating a track record of experience and expertise.
Other applications[edit]
The American Academy of Environmental Engineers board certifies licensed environmental engineers (Board Certified Environmental Engineer BCEE) and unlicensed environmental engineering practitioners (Board Certified Environmental Engineering Member BCEEM) for those with a degree in engineering and at least 8 years of practice and responsible charge in environmental engineering.
The American Institute of Floral Designers offers two levels of certification for individuals in the field of professional floral design. Certified Floral Designer (CFD) and accredited membership (AIFD) are both designed to establish a gold standard in professional floral design while ensuring the certified individual maintains that standard through continued education credits. While many state-level floral associations also offer state-level floral design certification known as Master Florist certification, AIFD certification is the highest level of professional floral design awarded in the United States.
The Canadian National Association of Infrared Imaging Technologists (AIIT) awards the IIT designation to infrared thermographers who meet the training standards regulated by the association. AIIT aims to ensure service delivery standards and public trust through regulating training standards, codes of conduct and continuing education.
The Society for Technical Communication (STC) is planning to create a certification program for technical writers in 2011.
The International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) is the International body who administers ANSI-accredited certification programs for arborists and tree care specialists. Certifications vary from Tree Worker to Certified Arborist to Master Arborist.
Criticisms[edit]
Political commentators have criticized professional or occupational licensing, especially medical and legal licensing, for restricting the supply of services and therefore making them more expensive, often putting them out of reach of the poor.[52][53]
The proliferation of IT certifications (both offered and attained) has led some technologists to question their value. Proprietary content that has been distributed on the Internet allows some to gain credentials without the implied depth or breadth of expertise.[citation needed]
See also[edit]
Academic inflation
European professional qualification directives
Homologation
Institute for Certification of Computing Professionals
Product certification
Vocational Competence Certificate
References[edit]
^ Phillip Barnhart, The Guide to National Professional Certification Programs (1997), HRD Press. ISBN 0-8493-9960-2 Retrieved electronically 7 July 2009.
^ AAFM, Investopedia Dictionary.
^ a b c International Board of Standards, gafm.org
^ "Public Radio in Mid America   Shaping the Future of Public Media". Prima.org. Retrieved 27 April 2017.
^ CQF Institute, cqfinstitute.org
^ "GFOAA   Home Page". www.GFOAA.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Certified Government Finance Officer". FGFOA.org. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ Cities, Florida League of. "Home". www.FGFOA.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Certified Government Finance Officer". GFOASC.org. Archived from the original on 17 January 2014. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Home". LAGFOA.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Certified Municipal Finance Officer". GFOANJ.org. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Government Finance Officers Association of NJ". www.GFOANJ.org. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Welcome to the TN CMFO Application system". www.comptroller.tn.gov. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Home   Tennessee Comptroller of the Treasury". www.comptroller.tn.gov. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Government Finance Officer". GFOASC.org. Archived from the original on 17 January 2014. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "GFOASC". www.GFOASC.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Certificate Program   North Carolina Government Finance Officers Association". www.NCGFOA.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Home   North Carolina Government Finance Officers Association". www.NCGFOA.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ a b c "International Dance Council CID". CID-Portal.org. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "International Certification of Dance Studies". CID-Portal.org. Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Certification | Dama". dama.org. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017.
^ "Emergency Management Institute (EMI)   EMI Programs and Activities". FEMA.gov. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2017.
^ "Executive Fire Officer Program". U.S. Fire Administration. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 10 September 2017.
^ "Crucial Factors for Implementing Warehouse Management System". Singapore Institute of Purchasing and Materials Management. 19 December 2021. Retrieved 14 February 2022.
^ Lewis, Michael (11 November 2004). Operations Management: Critical Perspectives on Business and Management, Vol. 4. Taylor & Francis. p. 38. ISBN 0-415-24928-7. Retrieved 30 October 2019.
^ "IECEx Home". www.IECEx.com. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Helping smaller countries protect their populations from danger in explosive environments New UNECE publication offers regulatory framework | UNECE".
^ "Certified in Exhibition Management (CEM)". Retrieved 10 October 2014.
^ "Purpose of Certification". ALAnet. Retrieved 26 January 2021.
^ "CLM Program". ALAnet. Retrieved 26 January 2021.
^ "CMC". Retrieved 2 November 2022.
^ "ICMCI". Retrieved 2 November 2022.
^ What Board Certification Means Archived 1 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Abms.org. Retrieved on 5 October 2013.
^ "AHIMA Certification". AHIMA.org. Retrieved 27 April 2017.
^ "Medical Coding   Medical Billing   Medical Auditing   AAPC". AAPC.com. Retrieved 27 April 2017.
^ "Medical Billing, Coding Training   Medical Association of Billers". PhysiciansWebsites.com. Retrieved 27 April 2017.
^ "PARfessionals, LLC". Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015.
^ "Student-Candidate Registration". PARfessionals, LLC. Retrieved 29 May 2015.
^ NCPRP Candidate Handbook. PARfessionals, LLC. 2014. p. 51.
^ "SMRP   The Society for Maintenance & Reliability Professionals". www.SMRP.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ "Plant Engineering and Maintenance Association of Canada   Home: Plant Engineering and Maintenance Association of Canada". www.PEMAC.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) website.
^ "IAP2 Canada - IAP2 Canada Professional Certification Program". iap2canada.ca. Retrieved 17 August 2019.
^ "IAP2 USA - Professional Certification". iap2usa.org. Retrieved 17 August 2019.
^ "Certification - 2018 - Final IAP2 USA Core Competencies.pdf". Google Docs. Retrieved 17 August 2019.
^ "Core CompetenciesCanada.CP3-Jun 017-Final (1).pdf". Google Docs. Retrieved 17 August 2019.
^ "Designation Programs - BOMI International". BOMI International. Retrieved 6 March 2022.
^ "Credentials". International Facility Management Association. Retrieved 7 March 2022.
^ "Get Certified | NABCEP". www.nabcep.org. Retrieved 21 February 2018.
^ "Certified Speaking Professional  (CSP)". NSASpeaker.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.[permanent dead link]
^ "National Speakers Association (NSA)   Where professional speakers connect". www.NSASpeaker.org. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
^ Segal, David (17 December 2011). "For Law Schools, a Price to Play the A.B.A.'s Way". The New York Times.
^ Professional Licensing Watch, Liberal Division   Hit & Run. Reason.com (17 September 2010). Retrieved on 2013-10-05.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Professional_certification&oldid=1146032623"