Military rank for a senior non-commissioned officer in the armed forces of some countries
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Master sergeant" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (May 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Comparative military ranks
Armies,air forces (non-Commonwealth),space forces
Navies, coast guard
Air forces(Commonwealth system)Flag commissioned officers
Field marshal orgeneral of the army orgeneral of the air force
Admiral ofthe fleet orgrand admiral
Marshal of the air force
General orcolonel general orarmy general
Admiral orgeneral admiral
Air chief marshal
Lieutenant general orarmy corps general
Vice admiral
Air marshal
Major general ordivisional general
Rear admiral or Counter admiral
Air vice-marshal
Brigadier orbrigadier general
Commodore orflotilla admiral
Air commodoreSenior commissioned officers
Colonel
Captain
Group captain
Lieutenant colonel
Commander
Wing commander
Major orcommandant
Lieutenantcommander
Squadron leaderJunior commissioned officers
Captain
Lieutenant
Flight lieutenant
Lieutenant orfirst lieutenant
Lieutenantjunior grade or sub-lieutenant
Flying officer
Second lieutenant or junior lieutenant
Ensign or midshipman
Pilot officer
Officer cadet
Officer cadet
Flight cadetNon-commissioned officers
Warrant officer orsergeant major
Warrant officer orchief petty officer
Warrant officer
Sergeant
Petty officer
SergeantEnlisted ranks
Corporal orbombardier orspecialist
Leading seaman
Corporal  or Leading aircraftman
Private orgunner ortrooper orsapper
Seaman
Aircraftman orairman oraviator
vte
A master sergeant is the military rank for a senior non-commissioned officer in the armed forces of some countries.
Israel Defense Forces[edit]
The  -    rav samal rishon (abbreviated "rasar", master sergeant) is a non-commissioned officer ( ) rank in the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). Because the IDF is an integrated force, they have a unique rank structure. IDF ranks are the same in all services (army, navy and air force). The ranks are derived from those of the paramilitary Haganah developed in the British Mandate of Palestine period to protect the Yishuv. This origin is reflected in the slightly-compacted IDF rank structure.[1]
Israel Defense Forces ranks :   nagadim - non-commissioned officers (NCO)
IDF NCOrank
 -  Rav nagad
 -    Rav samal bakh r
 -    Rav samal mitkadem
 -    Rav samal rishon
 -  Rav samal
Abbreviation
 "  Ranag
 "  Rasab
 "  Rasam
 "  Rasar
 "  Rasal
Correspondingrank
Chief warrant officer
Command sergeant major
Sergeant major
Master sergeant
Sergeant first class
Insignia
Philippines[edit]
Master sergeant is used by the Armed Forces of the Philippines as a non-commissioned officer rank. It is used by the Philippine Army, Philippine Air Force and the Philippine Marine Corps (under the Philippine Navy. The rank is below Senior master sergeant and above Technical sergeant.
As of February 8, 2019, a new ranking classification for the Philippine National Police was adopted, eliminating confusion of old ranks. Master sergeant is one of the new classification for non-commissioned officer rank. The rank stands above the Police Staff sergeant and below the Police Senior master sergeant.
Singapore[edit]
Singapore Armed Forces[edit]
In the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF), master sergeant is the highest rank amongst the specialist corps, ranking above staff sergeant and below third warrant officer.[2] In the Singapore Army, master sergeants are usually instructors, staff specialists, or sergeants major of battalion or company-sized units. They are addressed as "master" or "master sergeant". 
Specialist ranks of the Singapore Armed Forcesvte
Insignia
Rank
Third sergeant
Second sergeant
First sergeant
Staff sergeant
Master sergeant
Abbreviation
3SG
2SG
1SG
SSG
MSG
National Cadet Corps[edit]
In the National Cadet Corps (NCC), the rank of master sergeant is awarded to outstanding NCC cadets who have contributed greatly to their unit. The insignia of MSG (NCC) is the same as the SAF's, except that the letters 'NCC' are below the insignia, to differentiate SAF and NCC master sergeants.[3]
United States[edit]
Master sergeant Army and Marine insignia Air Force and Space Force insigniaCountry United StatesService branch U.S. Army U.S. Marine Corps U.S. Air Force U.S. Space ForceAbbreviationMSG (USA)MSgt (USMC, USAF, USSF, & CAP)Rank groupNon-commissioned officerNATO rank codeOR-8 (USA & USMC)OR-7 (USAF, USSF, & CAP)Pay gradeE-8 (USA & USMC)E-7 (USAF, USSF, & CAP)Next higher rankMaster Gunnery Sergeant (USMC)Sergeant major (USA & USMC)Senior master sergeant (USAF, USSF, & CAP)Next lower rankSergeant first class (USA)Gunnery sergeant (USMC)Technical sergeant (USAF, USSF, & CAP)
Master sergeant is a senior non-commissioned officer rank used within the United States Armed Forces by the United States Army, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force. It is ranked differently depending on the service branch. The Civil Air Patrol also has the rank of master sergeant.
U.S. Army[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
See also: United States Army enlisted rank insignia
Master sergeant (MSG) is the eighth enlisted grade (E-8), ranking above sergeant first class and below sergeant major, command sergeant major, Sergeant Major of the Army, and equal in grade but not authority to a first sergeant. It is abbreviated as MSG and indicated by three chevrons above three inverted arcs, commonly referred to as "rockers".
A master sergeant may be assigned as a brigade-level section noncommissioned officer in charge and serves as the subject matter expert in their field, but may also hold other positions depending on the type of unit. The equivalent-grade first sergeant is the senior noncommissioned officer of a company, battery, or troop.
When holding the position of first sergeant, while uncommon, the master sergeant is referred to as "first sergeant"; however, when not in the position of first sergeant, master sergeants are addressed as "sergeant". This is the standard address for all pay grades E-5 through E-8. Use of the term "top" or "master sergeant" is not a requirement, but is considered courteous, and remains to be at the discretion of the one addressing the master sergeant, though "top" is preferred, due to the long tradition of its use in the U.S. Army, which has, since the Civil War, emphasized the importance of senior NCOs closely advising and instructing newly-commissioned second lieutenants, first lieutenants and captains.
In 1920, the Army combined several regimental level "staff" NCO ranks, including four grades of sergeant major, three grades of quartermaster sergeant, regimental supply sergeant, senior ordnance sergeant, senior band sergeant, four grades of senior master sergeant, and seven additional master-level technical and specialist ranks into the new master sergeant rank. Master sergeant then became the senior enlisted rank, ranking above technical sergeant and first sergeant (a positional rank/title for the senior technical sergeant in a company/battery/troop), while "sergeant major" became a "courtesy title" for the senior master sergeant in a battalion/squadron or higher headquarters.
In 1942, the rank of first sergeant was elevated one grade and was then considered as a junior version of master sergeant, because while first sergeants served as senior NCOs at the company/battery/troop level, master sergeants held positions as the senior NCO in their MOS at battalion/squadron and higher level headquarters. In 1958, both first sergeant and master sergeant were elevated one grade to the new E-8 pay grade, while the rank of sergeant major was restored as the senior enlisted rank at the new pay grade of E-9.
U.S. Marine Corps[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
See also: United States Marine Corps rank insignia
The eighth enlisted grade, ranking above gunnery sergeant and below master gunnery sergeant, sergeant major, and Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps. It is equal in grade to first sergeant, and is abbreviated MSgt In the U.S. Marine Corps, master sergeants provide technical leadership as occupational specialists at the E-8 level.
Most infantry master sergeants serve as the operations chief of a weapons company, in place of the gunnery sergeant found in the company headquarters of a rifle company. Infantry master sergeants also serve as the assistant operations chief in the S-3 section of the headquarters of an infantry regiment and Marine Expeditionary Unit and in the G-3 section of the headquarters of a Marine Expeditionary Brigade. The Marine division and Marine Expeditionary Force headquarters contains two infantry master sergeants, one as the training SNCO and the other as the readiness chief.
Some combat support battalions have master sergeants at the company level (e.g., one as the tank leader, again replacing the company gunnery sergeant, in the operations section of the tank company headquarters, and two in the company headquarters of an assault amphibian company, one master sergeant as the company gunnery sergeant in the headquarters section and the other as the section leader of the company headquarters AMTRAC Section).
In Marine aircraft squadrons MSgts usually serve as SNCOICs of the ordnance and avionics divisions in the aircraft maintenance department. The Aircraft Maintenance Chief/SNCOIC is usually a MGySgt (q.v.), and there are eight aviation-related MSgt billets in each Marine Aviation Logistics Squadron (MALS). (A MALs is organic to each Marine Aircraft Group (MAG) and performs intermediate aviation supply, aircraft maintenance (including aviation life support equipment and avionics), and aviation ordnance support for its supported aircraft squadrons.)
Most non-infantry master sergeants serve as section chief/SNCOIC of their MOS type staff section in a battalion or higher level headquarters. General command leadership at this paygrade is provided by the separate rank of first sergeant.
Only in the Marine Corps are master sergeants required to be addressed by their full rank. In the Marine Corps, master sergeants may be referred to by the nickname of "Top". This usage is an informal one, however, and would not be used in an official or formal setting. Use of this nickname by Marines of subordinate rank is at the rank holder's discretion. In the U.S. Armed Forces, all master sergeants (Army, Air Force, and Marine Corps) are senior non-commissioned officers (i.e., pay grades E-7 through E-9). However, in the U.S. Marine Corps, the non-commissioned officer ranks of staff sergeant and above, are classified as Staff Non-Commissioned Officers (SNCOs), a classification that is unique in U.S. usage to the USMC.
U.S. Air Force[edit]
See also: United States Air Force enlisted rank insignia
Air Force master sergeantAir Force master sergeant serving as first sergeantObsolete master sergeant insignia(until 1991)
The seventh enlisted grade, ranking above technical sergeant and below senior master sergeant. It is abbreviated as MSgt. Advancement to master sergeant is one of the most significant promotions within the enlisted Air Force and Space Force. At the rank of master sergeant, the airman enters the senior non-commissioned tier and transitions his or her duties from front line technicians and supervisors to operational leaders.[4] An operational leader develops his or her leadership and management skills since this rank carries increased broad leadership, supervisory, and managerial responsibilities rather than technical performance.[4]
Per Air Force Instruction 36 2618, master sergeants do serve in positions as squadron superintendents, flight chiefs, section chiefs, and non-commissioned Officer in Charge (NCOIC). Master sergeants are the lowest pay grade in the Air Force and Space Force at which one can hold the special duty position and responsibilities of a first sergeant. Air Force first sergeants occupy the pay grades of E-7 through E-9 and are referred to officially as "first sergeant" regardless of pay grade, and unofficially as "first shirt" or "shirt".
In 1991, the Air Force changed its NCO insignia so that a maximum of five stripes, or rockers, were placed on the bottom of the chevrons. The master sergeant rank insignia was changed by removing the bottom (sixth) rocker, and relocating it above as a single chevron, on top of the five lower stripes.  The single chevron above visually identifies Senior NCO status for E-7 master sergeants along with two chevrons above for E-8 senior master sergeants and three chevrons above for E-9 chief master sergeants in the Air Force NCO insignia. In 2015, the Air Force announced its promotion overhaul and newly established boards for master sergeant.[5]
Civil Air Patrol[edit]
 Insignia of a Civil Air Patrol master sergeant
The Civil Air Patrol (CAP), a non-profit corporation Congressionally chartered to operate as the civilian auxiliary of the U.S. Air Force, has a quasi-military structure which includes the rank of master sergeant. The grade of master sergeant is below senior master sergeant and above technical sergeant. Former military enlisted personnel who held the rank of master sergeant in the United States Armed Forces may retain that rank as members of the CAP.[6]
U.S. Space Force[edit]
On February 1, 2021, the United States Space Force announced its permanent rank structure, establishing the grade of master sergeant as its permanent E-7 grade. This continued its usage from the Air Force. The grade of master sergeant is above technical sergeant and beneath senior master sergeant.[7]
Gallery[edit]
Master sergeant(Liberian Ground Forces)[8]
Master sergeant(Philippine Army)[9]
Master sergeant(Singapore Army)[10]
 - Maister-serzhant(Ukrainian Ground Forces)[11]
Master sergeant(United States Army)[12]
See also[edit]
Comparative military ranks
United States military pay
References[edit]
^ "       " [Order of ranks]. idf.il (in Hebrew). Israel Defense Forces. Retrieved 3 June 2021.
^ "SAF Military Ranks". www.mindef.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 2014-10-16.
^ "NCC Ranks and Badges". Anglo Chinese School (Independent). Retrieved 2018-12-06.
^ a b United States Air Force (23 March 2012). "AFI 36-2618, Enlisted Force Structure" (PDF). p. 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-06-25.
^ Losey, Stephen. "First master sgt. promotion board begins May 27". www.airforcetimes.com. Retrieved 2021-06-20.
^ Office of the National Commander   Civil Air Patrol (4 September 2018). "Memorandum for all CAP Members" (PDF). gocivilairpatrol.com. Retrieved 26 September 2021.
^ Cohen, Rachel S. (2021-01-29). "Space Force to Adopt 'Specialist,' Other New Ranks Feb. 1". Air Force Magazine. Retrieved 2021-01-29.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Defense Act of 2008" (PDF). 3 September 2008. p. 8. Retrieved 20 November 2017.
^ "Ranks and insignia". army.mil.ph. Philippine Army. Archived from the original on 28 April 2010. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
^ "SAF Rank Insignias". mindef.gov.sg. Ministry of Defence (Singapore). Retrieved 7 June 2021.
^ "   20.11.2017    606". zakon.rada.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). Ministry of Justice of Ukraine. 13 December 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2021.
^ "U.S. Army Ranks". army.mil. United States Army. Retrieved 27 May 2021.
External links[edit]
U.S. Army Enlisted Rank Insignia - Criteria, Background, and Images
The Master Sergeant Watershed - A Practical Guide for Supervisors of the Air Force's Critical Stripe
vteUnited States enlisted ranks
Pay gradeBranch of service
E-1
E-2
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9
Special
Army
PVT
PV2
PFC
 SPC   CPL
SGT
SSG
SFC
 MSG   1SG 
 SGM   CSM
 SMA   SEAC
Marine Corps
Pvt
PFC
LCpl
Cpl
Sgt
SSgt
GySgt
 MSgt   1stSgt 
 MGySgt   SgtMaj
 SMMC   SEAC
Navy
SR
SA
SN
PO3
PO2
PO1
CPO
 SCPO   CMDCS
 MCPO   CMDCM   FORCM, FLTCM
 MCPON   SEAC 
Air Force
AB
Amn
A1C
SrA
SSgt
TSgt
 MSgt   1st Sgt 
 SMSgt   1st Sgt 
 CMSgt   1st Sgt    CCM
 SEANGB   CMSAF   SEAC
Space Force
Spc1
Spc2
 Spc3
 Spc4
Sgt
TSgt
MSgt
SMSgt
CMSgt
 CMSSF   SEAC
Coast Guard
SR
SA
SN
PO3
PO2
PO1
CPO
SCPO
 MCPO   CMC   DMCPOCG2
MCPOCG
For the Army and Air Force, first sergeants are temporary and lateral ranks and are senior to their non-diamond counterparts, while Marine Corps first sergeants have no lateral movement within paygrade and is a permanent rank.
The rank insignia is used by other Coast Guard senior enlisted leaders.
The rank insignia for the Navy Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman is pending approval.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Master_sergeant&oldid=1149091384"