1857 U.S. Supreme Court case on the citizenship of African-Americans
1857 United States Supreme Court caseDred Scott v. SandfordSupreme Court of the United StatesArgued February 11 14, 1856Reargued December 15 18, 1856Decided March 6, 1857Full case nameDred Scott v. John F. A. Sandford[a]Citations60 U.S. 393 (more)19 How. 393; 15 L. Ed. 691; 1856 WL 8721; 1856 U.S. LEXIS 472DecisionOpinionCase historyPriorJudgment for defendant, C.C.D. Mo.HoldingJudgment reversed and suit dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. Persons of African descent cannot be and were never intended to be citizens under the U.S. Constitution. Plaintiff is without standing to file a suit.The Property Clause is applicable only to lands possessed at the time of the Constitution's ratification (1787). As such, Congress cannot ban slavery in the territories. The Missouri Compromise is unconstitutional.The Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment prohibits the federal government from freeing slaves brought into federal territories.Court membership
Chief Justice
Roger B. Taney
Associate Justices
John McLean  James M. WayneJohn Catron  Peter V. DanielSamuel Nelson  Robert C. GrierBenjamin R. Curtis  John A. Campbell
Case opinionsMajorityTaney, joined by Wayne, Catron, Daniel, Nelson, Grier, CampbellConcurrenceWayneConcurrenceCatronConcurrenceDanielConcurrenceNelson, joined by GrierConcurrenceGrierConcurrenceCampbellDissentMcLeanDissentCurtisLaws appliedU.S. Const. amend. V; U.S. Const. art. IV,   3, cl. 2; Strader v. Graham; Missouri CompromiseSuperseded byU.S. Const. amends. XIII, XIV, XV;Civil Rights Act of 1866
Dred Scott v. Sandford,[a] 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court that held the U.S. Constitution did not extend American citizenship to people of black African descent, and thus they could not enjoy the rights and privileges the Constitution conferred upon American citizens.[2][3] The decision is widely considered the worst ever rendered in the Supreme Court's history, being widely denounced for its overt racism, perceived judicial activism and poor legal reasoning, and for its crucial role in the start of the American Civil War four years later.[4][5][6] Legal scholar Bernard Schwartz said that it "stands first in any list of the worst Supreme Court decisions". Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes called it the Court's "greatest self-inflicted wound".[7]
The decision involved the case of Dred Scott, an enslaved black man whose owners had taken him from Missouri, a slave-holding state, into Illinois and the Wisconsin Territory, where slavery was illegal. When his owners later brought him back to Missouri, Scott sued for his freedom and claimed that because he had been taken into "free" U.S. territory, he had automatically been freed and was legally no longer a slave. Scott sued first in Missouri state court, which ruled that he was still a slave under its law. He then sued in U.S. federal court, which ruled against him by deciding that it had to apply Missouri law to the case. He then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
In March 1857, the Supreme Court issued a 7 2 decision against Scott. In an opinion written by Chief Justice Roger Taney, the Court ruled that people of African descent "are not included, and were not intended to be included, under the word 'citizens' in the Constitution, and can therefore claim none of the rights and privileges which that instrument provides for and secures to citizens of the United States". Taney supported his ruling with an extended survey of American state and local laws from the time of the Constitution's drafting in 1787 that purported to show that a "perpetual and impassable barrier was intended to be erected between the white race and the one which they had reduced to slavery". Because the Court ruled that Scott was not an American citizen, he was also not a citizen of any state and, accordingly, could never establish the "diversity of citizenship" that Article III of the U.S. Constitution requires for a U.S. federal court to be able to exercise jurisdiction over a case.[2] After ruling on those issues surrounding Scott, Taney struck down the Missouri Compromise as a limitation on slave owners' property rights that exceeded the U.S. Congress's constitutional powers.
Although Taney and several other justices hoped the decision would settle the slavery controversy, which was increasingly dividing the American public, the decision only exacerbated interstate tension.[8] Taney's majority opinion suited the slaveholding states, but was intensely decried in all the other states.[3] The decision inflamed the national debate over slavery and deepened the divide that led ultimately to the American Civil War. In 1865, after the Union's victory, the Court's ruling in Dred Scott was superseded by the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which abolished slavery, and the Fourteenth Amendment, whose first section guaranteed citizenship for "[a]ll persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof".
Historians agree that the Court decision was a major disaster for the nation as it dramatically inflamed tensions leading to the Civil War.[9][10][11] According to historian David W. Blight, 1857 was "the great pivot on the road to disunion...largely because of the Dred Scott case, which stoked the fear, distrust and conspiratorial hatred already common in both the North and the South to new levels of intensity."[12] The ruling is widely considered a blatant act of judicial activism[13] with the intent of bringing finality to the territorial crisis resulting from the Louisiana Purchase by creating a constitutional right to own slaves anywhere in the country while permanently disenfranchising all people of African descent.[14] The court's decision to overturn the Missouri Compromise, which had already been replaced with the Kansas Nebraska Act and thus was a legally moot issue, is cited as proof of this because the latter act was determined by the due process of popular sovereignty, and thus could not be overturned the same way the court did the Missouri compromise.[15] During the United States election of 1860, abolitionists formed the Republican Party that rejected the ruling as being corrupted by partisanship and non-binding because the court had no jurisdiction. Their Presidential nominee, Abraham Lincoln, stated he would not permit slavery anywhere in the country except where it already existed, which directly contradicted the court's ruling. His election is considered the final event that led the Southern states to secede from the Union, igniting the American Civil War.[16]
Background[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Dred Scott v. Sandford" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (March 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Political setting[edit]
 The Missouri Compromise created the slave-holding state Missouri (Mo., yellow) but prohibited slavery in the rest of the former Louisiana Territory (here, marked Missouri Territory 1812, green) north of the 36 30' North parallel.
In the late 1810s, a major political dispute arose over the creation of new American states from the vast territory the United States had acquired from France in 1803 through the Louisiana Purchase.[17] The dispute centered on whether the new states would be "free" states, like the Northern states, in which slavery would be illegal, or whether they would be "slave" states, like the Southern states, in which slavery would be legal.[17] The Southern states wanted the new states to be slave states in order to enhance their own political and economic power. The Northern states wanted the new states to be free states for their own political and economic reasons, as well as their moral concerns over allowing the institution of slavery to expand.
In 1820, the U.S. Congress passed legislation known as the "Missouri Compromise" that was intended to resolve the dispute. The Compromise first admitted Maine into the Union as a free state, then created Missouri out of a portion of the Louisiana Purchase territory and admitted it as a slave state; at the same time it prohibited slavery in the area north of the Parallel 36 30  north, where most of the territory lay.[17] The legal effects of a slaveowner taking his slaves from Missouri into the free territory north of the 36 30  north parallel, as well as the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise itself, eventually came to a head in the Dred Scott case.
Dred Scott and John Emerson[edit]
Main article: Dred Scott
 Dred Scott
Dred Scott was born a slave in Virginia around 1799.[18] Little is known of his early years.[19] His owner, Peter Blow, moved to Alabama in 1818, taking his six slaves along to work a farm near Huntsville. In 1830, Blow gave up farming and settled in St. Louis, Missouri, where he sold Scott to U.S. Army surgeon Dr. John Emerson.[20] After purchasing Scott, Emerson took him to Fort Armstrong in Illinois. A free state, Illinois had been free as a territory under the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, and had prohibited slavery in its constitution in 1819 when it was admitted as a state.
In 1836, Emerson moved with Scott from Illinois to Fort Snelling in the Wisconsin territory in what has become the state of Minnesota. Slavery in the Wisconsin Territory (some of which, including Fort Snelling, was part of the Louisiana Purchase) was prohibited by the U.S. Congress under the Missouri Compromise. During his stay at Fort Snelling, Scott married Harriet Robinson in a civil ceremony by Harriet's owner, Major Lawrence Taliaferro, a justice of the peace who was also an Indian agent. The ceremony would have been unnecessary had Dred Scott been a slave, as slave marriages had no recognition in the law.[21][20]
In 1837, the army ordered Emerson to Jefferson Barracks Military Post, south of St. Louis. Emerson left Scott and his wife at Fort Snelling, where he leased their services out for profit. By hiring Scott out in a free state, Emerson was effectively bringing the institution of slavery into a free state, which was a direct violation of the Missouri Compromise, the Northwest Ordinance, and the Wisconsin Enabling Act.[21]
Irene Sanford Emerson[edit]
Before the end of the year, the army reassigned Emerson to Fort Jesup in Louisiana, where Emerson married Eliza Irene Sanford in February 1838. Emerson sent for Scott and Harriet, who proceeded to Louisiana to serve their master and his wife. Within months, Emerson was transferred back to Fort Snelling. While en route to Fort Snelling, Scott's daughter Eliza was born on a steamboat under way on the Mississippi River between Illinois and what would become Iowa. Because Eliza was born in free territory, she was technically born as a free person under both federal and state laws. Upon entering Louisiana, the Scotts could have sued for their freedom, but did not. One scholar suggests that, in all likelihood, the Scotts would have been granted their freedom by a Louisiana court, as it had respected laws of free states that slaveholders forfeited their right to slaves if they brought them in for extended periods. This had been the holding in Louisiana state courts for more than 20 years.[21]
Toward the end of 1838, the army reassigned Emerson back to Fort Snelling. By 1840, Emerson's wife Irene returned to St. Louis with their slaves, while Dr. Emerson served in the Seminole War. While in St. Louis, she hired them out. In 1842, Emerson left the army. After he died in the Iowa Territory in 1843, his widow Irene inherited his estate, including the Scotts. For three years after John Emerson's death, she continued to lease out the Scotts as hired slaves. In 1846, Scott attempted to purchase his and his family's freedom, but Irene Emerson refused, prompting Scott to resort to legal recourse.[22]
Procedural history[edit]
Scott v. Emerson[edit]
First state circuit court trial[edit]
Events leading to  the American Civil War
Economic
End of Atlantic slave trade
Panic of 1857
Political
Northwest Ordinance
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Gag rule
Tariff of 1828
End of slavery in British colonies
Texas Revolution
Texas annexation
Mexican American War
Wilmot Proviso
Nashville Convention
Compromise of 1850
Fugitive Slave Act of 1850
Kansas Nebraska Act
Ostend Manifesto
Caning of Charles Sumner
Lincoln Douglas debates
1860 presidential election
Crittenden Compromise
Secession of Southern states
Peace Conference of 1861
Corwin Amendment
Social
Nat Turner's slave rebellion
Martyrdom of Elijah Lovejoy
Burning of Pennsylvania Hall
American Slavery As It Is
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Bleeding Kansas
The Impending Crisis of the South
Oberlin Wellington Rescue
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Judicial
Trial of Reuben Crandall
Commonwealth v. Aves
The Amistad affair
Prigg v. Pennsylvania
Recapture of Anthony Burns
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Virginia v. John Brown
Military
Star of the West
Battle of Fort Sumter
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
vteHaving been unsuccessful in his attempt to purchase his freedom, Dred Scott, with the help of his legal advisers, sued Emerson for his freedom in the Circuit Court of St. Louis County on April 6, 1846.[23]: 36  A separate petition was filed for his wife Harriet, making them the first married couple to file freedom suits in tandem in its 50-year history.[24]: 232  They received financial assistance from the family of Dred's previous owner, Peter Blow.[21] Blow's daughter Charlotte was married to Joseph Charless, an officer at the Bank of Missouri. Charless signed legal documents as security for the Scotts and later secured the services of the bank's attorney, Samuel Mansfield Bay, for the trial.[20]
It was expected that the Scotts would win their freedom with relative ease.[21][24]: 241  By 1846, dozens of freedom suits had been won in Missouri by former slaves.[24] Most had claimed their legal right to freedom on the basis that they, or their mothers, had previously lived in free states or territories.[24] Among the most important legal precedents were Winny v. Whitesides[25] and Rachel v. Walker.[26] In Winny v. Whitesides, the Missouri Supreme Court had ruled in 1824 that a person who had been held as a slave in Illinois, where slavery was illegal, and then brought to Missouri, was free by virtue of residence in a free state.[23]: 41  In Rachel v. Walker, the state supreme court had ruled that a U.S. Army officer who took a slave to a military post in a territory where slavery was prohibited and retained her there for several years, had thereby "forfeit[ed] his property".[23]: 42  Rachel, like Dred Scott, had accompanied her enslaver to Fort Snelling.[23]
Scott was represented by three different lawyers from the filing of the original petition to the time of the actual trial, over one year later. The first was Francis B. Murdoch, a prolific freedom suit attorney who abruptly left St. Louis.[27][23]: 38  Murdoch was replaced by Charles D. Drake, an in-law of the Blow family.[23] When Drake also left the state, Samuel M. Bay took over as the Scotts' lawyer.[23] Irene Emerson was represented by George W. Goode, a proslavery lawyer from Virginia.[28]: 130  By the time the case went to trial, it had been reassigned from Judge John M. Krum, who was proslavery, to Judge Alexander Hamilton, who was known to be sympathetic to freedom suits.[20]
Dred Scott v. Irene Emerson finally went to trial for the first time on June 30, 1847.[28]: 130  Henry Peter Blow testified in court that his father had owned Dred and sold him to John Emerson.[23]: 44  The fact that Scott had been taken to live on free soil was clearly established through depositions from witnesses who had known Scott and Dr. Emerson at Fort Armstrong and Fort Snelling.[28]: 130 131  Grocer Samuel Russell testified that he had hired the Scotts from Irene Emerson and paid her father, Alexander Sanford, for their services.[28] Upon cross examination, however, Russell admitted that the leasing arrangements had actually been made by his wife, Adeline.[28]
Thus, Russell's testimony was ruled hearsay, and the jury returned a verdict for Emerson.[20] This created a seemingly contradictory outcome in which Scott was ordered by the court to remain Irene Emerson's slave, because he had been unable to prove that he was previously Irene Emerson's slave.[20]
First state supreme court appeal[edit]
Bay moved immediately for a new trial on the basis that Scott's case had been lost due to a technicality which could be rectified, rather than the facts.[23]: 47  Judge Hamilton finally issued the order for a new trial on December 2, 1847.[23] Two days later, Emerson's lawyer objected to a new trial by filing a bill of exceptions.[23][28]: 131  The case was then taken on writ of error to the Supreme Court of Missouri.[20] Scott's new lawyers, Alexander P. Field and David N. Hall, argued that the writ of error was inappropriate because the lower court had not yet issued a final judgment.[23]: 50  The state supreme court agreed unanimously with their position and dismissed Emerson's appeal on June 30, 1848.[23] The main issue before the court at this stage was procedural and no substantive issues were discussed.[23]
Second state circuit court trial[edit]
Before the state supreme court had convened, Goode had presented a motion on behalf of Emerson to have Scott taken into custody and hired out.[28] On March 17, 1848, Judge Hamilton issued the order to the St. Louis County sheriff.[23][b] Anyone hiring Scott had to post a bond of six-hundred dollars.[23]: 49  Wages he earned during that time were placed in escrow, to be paid to the party that prevailed in the lawsuit.[23] Scott would remain in the sheriff's custody or hired out by him until March 18, 1857.[23] One of Scott's lawyers, David N. Hall, hired him starting March 17, 1849.[24]: 261 
The St. Louis Fire of 1849, a cholera epidemic, and two continuances delayed the retrial in the St. Louis Circuit Court until January 12, 1850.[20][23]: 51  Irene Emerson was now defended by Hugh A. Garland and Lyman D. Norris, while Scott was represented by Field and Hall.[23] Judge Alexander Hamilton was presiding.[20] The proceedings were similar to the first trial.[23]: 52  The same depositions from Catherine A. Anderson and Miles H. Clark were used to establish that Dr. Emerson had taken Scott to free territory.[23]
This time, the hearsay problem was surmounted by a deposition from Adeline Russell stating that she had hired the Scotts from Irene Emerson, thereby proving that Emerson claimed them as her slaves.[23] Samuel Russell testified in court once again that he had paid for their services.[23] The defense then changed strategy and argued in their summation that Mrs. Emerson had every right to hire out Dred Scott, because he had lived with Dr. Emerson at Fort Armstrong and Fort Snelling under military jurisdiction, not under civil law.[23][28]: 132  In doing so, the defense ignored the precedent set by Rachel v. Walker.[28] In his rebuttal, Hall stated that the fact that they were military posts did not matter, and pointed out that Dr. Emerson had left Scott behind at Fort Snelling, hired out to others, after being reassigned to a new post.[29]
The jury quickly returned a verdict in favor of Dred Scott, nominally making him a free man.[28][23]: 53  Judge Hamilton declared Harriet, Eliza and Lizzie Scott to be free as well.[23] Garland moved immediately for a new trial, and was overruled.[29][23]: 55  On February 13, 1850, Emerson's defense filed a bill of exceptions, which was certified by Judge Hamilton, setting into motion another appeal to the Missouri Supreme Court.[23] Counsel for the opposing sides signed an agreement that moving forward, only Dred Scott v. Irene Emerson would be advanced, and that any decision made by the high court would apply to Harriet's suit, also.[23]: 43  In 1849 or 1850, Irene Emerson left St. Louis and moved to Springfield, Massachusetts.[23]: 55  Her brother, John F. A. Sanford, continued looking after her business interests when she left,[30] and her departure had no impact on the case.[23]: 56 
Second state supreme court appeal[edit]
Both parties filed briefs with the Supreme Court of Missouri on March 8, 1850.[23]: 57  A busy docket delayed consideration of the case until the October term.[28]: 133  By then, the issue of slavery had become politically charged, even within the judiciary.[31][28]: 134  Although the Missouri Supreme Court had not yet overturned precedent in freedom suits, in the 1840s, the court's proslavery justices had explicitly stated their opposition to freeing slaves.[31] After the court convened on October 25, 1850, the two justices who were proslavery anti-Benton Democrats   William Barclay Napton and James Harvey Birch   persuaded John Ferguson Ryland, a Benton Democrat, to join them in a unanimous decision that Dred Scott remained a slave under Missouri law.[28][23]: 60  However, Judge Napton delayed writing the court's opinion for months. Then in August 1851, both Napton and Birch lost their seats in the Missouri Supreme Court, following the state's first supreme court election, with only Ryland remaining as an incumbent. The case thus needed to be considered again by the newly elected court.[28]: 135  The reorganized Missouri Supreme Court now included two moderates   Hamilton Gamble and John Ryland   and one staunch proslavery justice, William Scott.[31]
David N. Hall had prepared the brief for Dred Scott, but died in March 1851.[23]: 57, 61  Alexander P. Field continued alone as counsel for Dred Scott, and resubmitted the same briefs from 1850 for both sides. On November 29, 1851, the case was taken under consideration, on written briefs alone, and a decision was reached.[23] However, before Judge Scott could write the court's opinion, Lyman Norris, co-counsel for Irene Emerson, obtained permission to submit a new brief he had been preparing, to replace the original one submitted by Garland.[23]: 56,61 
Norris's brief has been characterized as "a sweeping denunciation of the authority of both the [Northwest] Ordinance of 1787 and the Missouri Compromise."[23]: 62  Although he stopped short of questioning their constitutionality, Norris questioned their applicability and criticized the early Missouri Supreme Court, ridiculing former Justice George Tompkins as "the great apostle of freedom at that day."[31][23]
Reviewing the court's past decisions on freedom suits, Norris acknowledged that if Rachel v. Walker was allowed to stand, his client would lose.[31] Norris then challenged the concept of "once free, always free", and asserted that the court under Tompkins had been wrong to rule that the Ordinance of 1787 remained in force after the ratification of the U.S. Constitution in 1788.[31] Finally, he argued that the Missouri Compromise should be disregarded whenever it interfered with Missouri law, and that the laws of other states should not be enforced, if their enforcement would cause Missouri citizens to lose their property.[31] In support of his argument, he cited Chief Justice Roger B. Taney's opinion in the United States Supreme Court case Strader v. Graham, which argued that the status of a slave returning from a free state must be determined by the slave state itself.[31][23]: 63  According to historian Walter Ehrlich, the closing of Norris's brief was "a racist harangue that not only revealed the prejudices of its author, but also indicated how the Dred Scott case had become a vehicle for the expression of such views".[23]: 63  Noting that Norris's proslavery "doctrines" were later incorporated into the court's final decision,[23]: 62  Ehrlich writes (emphasis his):From this point on, the Dred Scott case clearly changed from a genuine freedom suit to the controversial political issue for which it became infamous in American history.[23]On March 22, 1852, Judge William Scott announced the decision of the Missouri Supreme Court that Dred Scott remained a slave, and ordered the trial court's judgment to be reversed.[28]: 137  Judge Ryland concurred, while Chief Justice Hamilton Gamble dissented.[31] The majority opinion written by Judge Scott focused on the issue of comity or conflict of laws,[28] and relied on states' rights rhetoric:[23]: 65 Every State has the right of determining how far, in a spirit of comity, it will respect the laws of other States. Those laws have no intrinsic right to be enforced beyond the limits of the State for which they were enacted. The respect allowed them will depend altogether on their conformity to the policy of our institutions. No State is bound to carry into effect enactments conceived in a spirit hostile to that which pervades her own laws.[32]Judge Scott did not deny the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise, and acknowledged that its prohibition of slavery was "absolute", but only within the specified territory. Thus, a slave crossing the border could obtain his freedom, but only within the court of the free state.[23] Rejecting the court's own precedent, Scott argued that "'Once free' did not necessarily mean 'always free.'"[23]: 66  He cited the Kentucky Court of Appeals decision in Graham v. Strader, which had held that a Kentucky slaveowner who permitted a slave to go to Ohio temporarily, did not forfeit ownership of the slave.[23] To justify overturning three decades of precedent, Judge Scott argued that circumstances had changed:[28]Times now are not as they were when the former decisions on this subject were made. Since then not only individuals but States have been possessed with a dark and fell spirit in relation to slavery, whose gratification is sought in the pursuit of measures, whose inevitable consequence must be the overthrow and destruction of our government. Under such circumstances it does not behoove the State of Missouri to show the least countenance to any measure which might gratify this spirit. She is willing to assume her full responsibility for the existence of slavery within her limits, nor does she seek to share or divide it with others.[32]On March 23, 1852, the day after the Missouri Supreme Court decision had been announced, Irene Emerson's lawyers filed an order in the St. Louis Circuit Court for the bonds signed by the Blow family to cover the Scotts' court costs; return of the slaves themselves; and transfer of their wages earned over four years, plus 6 percent interest.[20] On June 29, 1852, Judge Hamilton overruled the order.[23]: 70 
Scott v. Sanford[edit]
The case looked hopeless, and the Blow family could no longer pay for Scott's legal costs. Scott also lost both of his lawyers when Alexander Field moved to Louisiana and David Hall died. The case was undertaken pro bono by Roswell Field, who employed Scott as a janitor. Field also discussed the case with LaBeaume, who had taken over the lease on the Scotts in 1851.[33] After the Missouri Supreme Court decision, Judge Hamilton turned down a request by Emerson's lawyers to release the rent payments from escrow and to deliver the slaves into their owner's custody.[20]
In 1853, Dred Scott again sued his current owner John Sanford, but this time in federal court. Sanford returned to New York and the federal courts had diversity jurisdiction under Article III, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution. In addition to the existing complaints, Scott alleged that Sanford had assaulted his family and held them captive for six hours on January 1, 1853.[34]
At trial in 1854, Judge Robert William Wells directed the jury to rely on Missouri law on the question of Scott's freedom. Since the Missouri Supreme Court had held that Scott remained a slave, the jury found in favor of Sanford. Scott then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, where the clerk misspelled the defendant's name, and the case was recorded as Dred Scott v. Sandford, with an ever-erroneous title. Scott was represented before the Supreme Court by Montgomery Blair and George Ticknor Curtis, whose brother Benjamin was a Supreme Court Justice. Sanford was represented by Reverdy Johnson and Henry S. Geyer.[20]
Sanford as defendant[edit]
When the case was filed, the two sides agreed on a statement of facts that claimed Scott had been sold by Dr. Emerson to John Sanford, though this was a legal fiction. Dr. Emerson had died in 1843, and Dred Scott had filed his 1847 suit against Irene Emerson. There is no record of Dred Scott's transfer to Sanford or of his transfer back to Irene. John Sanford died shortly before Scott's manumission, and Scott was not listed in the probate records of Sanford's estate.[33] Also, Sanford was not acting as Dr. Emerson's executor, as he was never appointed by a probate court, and the Emerson estate had been settled when the federal case was filed.[21]
The murky circumstances of ownership led many to conclude the parties to Dred Scott v. Sandford contrived to create a test case.[22][33][34] Mrs. Emerson's remarriage to abolitionist U.S. Representative Calvin C. Chaffee seemed suspicious to contemporaries, and Sanford was thought to be a front and to have allowed himself to be sued, despite not actually being Scott's owner. Nevertheless, Sanford had been involved in the case since 1847, before his sister married Chaffee. He had secured counsel for his sister in the state case, and he engaged the same lawyer for his own defense in the federal case.[22] Sanford also consented to be represented by genuine pro-slavery advocates before the Supreme Court, rather than to put up a token defense.
Influence of President Buchanan[edit]
Historians discovered that after the Supreme Court heard arguments in the case but before it issued a ruling, President-elect James Buchanan wrote to his friend, Supreme Court Associate Justice John Catron, to ask whether the case would be decided by the Court before his inauguration in March 1857.[35] Buchanan hoped that the decision would quell unrest in the country over the slavery issue by issuing a ruling to take it out of political debate. He later successfully pressured Associate Justice Robert Cooper Grier, a Northerner, to join the Southern majority in Dred Scott to prevent the appearance that the decision was made along sectional lines.[36]  According to historian Paul Finkelman: Buchanan already knew what the Court was going to decide. In a major breach of Court etiquette, Justice Grier, who, like Buchanan, was from Pennsylvania, had kept the President-elect fully informed about the progress of the case and the internal debates within the Court. When Buchanan urged the nation to support the decision, he already knew what Taney would say. Republican suspicions of impropriety turned out to be fully justified. [37]
Biographer Jean H. Baker argues that Buchanan's use of political pressure on a member of a sitting court was regarded then, as now, to be highly improper.[38] Republicans fueled speculation as to Buchanan's influence by publicizing that Taney had secretly informed Buchanan of the decision. Buchanan declared in his inaugural address that the slavery question would "be speedily and finally settled" by the Supreme Court.[39][21]
Supreme Court decision[edit]
On March 6, 1857, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled against Dred Scott in a 7 2 decision that fills over 200 pages in the United States Reports.[17] The decision contains opinions from all nine justices, but the "majority opinion" has always been the focus of the controversy.[40]
Opinion of the Court[edit]
 Chief justice Roger Taney, the author of the majority opinion in the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision
Seven justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by Chief Justice Roger Taney. Taney began the Court's opinion with what he saw as the core issue in the case: whether or not black people could possess federal citizenship under the U.S. Constitution.[17]
The question is simply this: Can a negro, whose ancestors were imported into this country, and sold as slaves, become a member of the political community formed and brought into existence by the Constitution of the United States, and as such become entitled to all of the rights, and privileges, and immunities, guarantied  [sic] by that instrument to the citizen? Dred Scott, 60 U.S. at 403.
In answer, the Court ruled that they could not. It held that black people could not be American citizens, and therefore a lawsuit to which they were a party could never qualify for the "diversity of citizenship" that Article III of the Constitution requires for American federal courts to have jurisdiction over cases that do not involve federal questions.[17]
The primary rationale for the Court's ruling was Taney's assertion that black African slaves and their descendants were never intended to be part of the American social and political landscape.[17]
We think ... that they [black people] are not included, and were not intended to be included, under the word "citizens" in the Constitution, and can therefore claim none of the rights and privileges which that instrument provides for and secures to citizens of the United States. On the contrary, they were at that time [of America's founding] considered as a subordinate and inferior class of beings who had been subjugated by the dominant race, and, whether emancipated or not, yet remained subject to their authority, and had no rights or privileges but such as those who held the power and the Government might choose to grant them. Dred Scott, 60 U.S. at 404 05.[41]
Taney then extensively reviewed laws from the original American states that involved the status of black Americans at the time of the Constitution's drafting in 1787.[17] He concluded that these laws showed that a "perpetual and impassable barrier was intended to be erected between the white race and the one which they had reduced to slavery".[42] Thus, he concluded, black people were not American citizens, and could not sue as citizens in federal courts.[17] This meant that U.S. states lacked the power to alter the legal status of black people by granting them state citizenship.[40]
It is difficult at this day to realize the state of public opinion in relation to that unfortunate race, which prevailed in the civilized and enlightened portions of the world at the time of the Declaration of Independence, and when the Constitution of the United States was framed and adopted. ... They had for more than a century before been regarded as beings of an inferior order ... and so far inferior, that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect; and that the negro might justly and lawfully be reduced to slavery for his benefit. Dred Scott, 60 U.S. at 407.
This holding normally would have ended the decision, since it disposed of Dred Scott's case, but Taney did not conclude the matter before the Court in the normal manner.[17] He went on to assess the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise itself, writing that the Compromise's legal provisions intended to free slaves who were living north of the 36 N latitude line in the western territories. In the Court's judgment, this would constitute the government depriving slaveowners of their property since slaves were legally the property of their owners without due process of law, which is forbidden under the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution.[43] Taney also reasoned that the Constitution and the Bill of Rights implicitly precluded any possibility of constitutional rights for black African slaves and their descendants.[40] Thus, Taney concluded:
Now, ... the right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution. ... Upon these considerations, it is the opinion of the court that the act of Congress which prohibited a citizen from holding and owning property of this kind in the territory of the United States north of the [36 N 36' latitude] line therein mentioned is not warranted by the Constitution, and is therefore void.... Dred Scott, 60 U.S. at 451 52.
Taney held that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional, marking the first time since the 1803 case Marbury v. Madison that the Supreme Court had struck down a federal law, although the Missouri Compromise had already been effectively overridden by the Kansas Nebraska Act. Taney made this argument on a narrow definition of the Property Clause of Section 3 of Article 4 of the Constitution. The Property Clause states, "The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States..." Taney made the argument that the Property Clause "applied only to the property which the States held in common at that time, and has no reference whatever to any territory or other property which the new sovereignty might afterwards itself acquire."[44] Taney asserted that because the Northwest Territory was not part of the United States at the time of the Constitution's ratification, Congress did not have the authority to ban slavery in the territory. According to Taney, the Missouri Compromise exceeded the scope of Congress's powers and was unconstitutional, and thus Dred Scott was still a slave regardless of his time spent in the parts of the Northwest Territory that were north of 36 N,[45] and he was still a slave under Missouri law, and the Court had to follow Missouri law in the matter. For all these reasons, the Court concluded that Scott could not bring suit in U.S. federal court.[45]
Dissents[edit]
Justices Benjamin Robbins Curtis (left) and John McLean (right), the only two justices who dissented in Dred Scott
Justices Benjamin Robbins Curtis and John McLean were the only two dissenters from the Court's decision, and both filed dissenting opinions.
Curtis's 67-page dissent argued that the Court's conclusion that black people could not possess federal U.S. citizenship was legally and historically baseless.[40] Curtis pointed out that at the time of the Constitution's adoption in 1789, black men could vote in five of the 13 states. Legally, that made them citizens of both their individual states and the United States federally. Curtis cited many state statutes and state court decisions supporting his position. His dissent was "extremely persuasive", and it prompted Taney to add 18 additional pages to his opinion in an attempt to rebut Curtis's arguments.[40]
McLean's dissent deemed the argument that black people could not be citizens "more a matter of taste than of law". He attacked much of the Court's decision as obiter dicta that was not legally authoritative on the ground that once the court determined that it did not have jurisdiction to hear Scott's case, it should have simply dismissed the action, rather than passing judgment on the merits of the claims.
Curtis and McLean both attacked the Court's overturning of the Missouri Compromise on its merits. They noted that it was not necessary to decide the question and that none of the authors of the Constitution had ever objected on constitutional grounds to the Congress's adoption of the antislavery provisions of the Northwest Ordinance passed by the Continental Congress or the subsequent acts that barred slavery north of 36 30' N, or the prohibition on importing slaves from overseas passed in 1808.  Curtis said slavery was not listed in the constitution as a "natural right", but rather a creation of municipal law.  He pointed out the constitution said "The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to Prejudice any Claims of the United States, or of any particular State."  Since slavery was not mentioned as an exception, he felt a prohibition of it fell within the scope of needed rules and regulations Congress was free to pass.[46]
Reactions[edit]
The Supreme Court's decision in Dred Scott was "greeted with unmitigated wrath from every segment of the United States except the slave holding states."[40] The American political historian Robert G. McCloskey described:
The tempest of malediction that burst over the judges seems to have stunned them; far from extinguishing the slavery controversy, they had fanned its flames and had, moreover, deeply endangered the security of the judicial arm of government. No such vilification as this had been heard even in the wrathful days following the Alien and Sedition Acts. Taney s opinion was assailed by the Northern press as a wicked  stump speech  and was shamefully misquoted and distorted.  If the people obey this decision," said one newspaper, "they disobey God."[45]
Many Republicans, including Abraham Lincoln, who was rapidly becoming the leading Republican in Illinois, regarded the decision as part of a plot to expand and eventually impose the legalization of slavery throughout all of the states.[47] Some southern extremists wanted all states to recognize slavery as a constitutional right.  Lincoln rejected the court's majority opinion that "the right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution," pointing out that the constitution did not ever mention property in reference to slaves and in fact explicitly referred to them as "persons".[48] Southern Democrats considered Republicans to be lawless rebels who were provoking disunion by their refusal to accept the Supreme Court's decision as the law of the land. Many northern opponents of slavery offered a legal argument for refusing to recognize the Dred Scott decision on the Missouri Compromise as binding. They argued that the Court's determination that the federal courts had no jurisdiction to hear the case rendered the remainder of the decision obiter dicta non binding passing remarks rather than an authoritative interpretation of the law. Douglas attacked that position in the Lincoln-Douglas debates:Mr. Lincoln goes for a warfare upon the Supreme Court of the United States, because of their judicial decision in the Dred Scott case. I yield obedience to the decisions in that court to the final determination of the highest judicial tribunal known to our constitution.
In a speech at Springfield, Illinois, Lincoln responded that the Republican Party was not seeking to defy the Supreme Court, but he hoped they could convince it to reverse its ruling.[49]
We believe, as much as Judge Douglas, (perhaps more) in obedience to, and respect for the judicial department of government. We think its decisions on Constitutional questions, when fully settled, should control, not only the particular cases decided, but the general policy of the country, subject to be disturbed only by amendment of the Constitution as provided in that instrument itself. More than this would be revolution. But we think the Dred Scott decision is erroneous. We know the court that made it, has often over-ruled its own decisions, and we shall do what we can to have it to over-rule this. We offer no resistance to it.
Democrats had refused to accept the court's interpretation of the U.S. Constitution as permanently binding. During the Andrew Jackson administration, Taney, then Attorney General, had written: Whatever may be the force of the decision of the Supreme Court in binding the parties and settling their rights in the particular case before them, I am not prepared to admit that a construction given to the constitution by the Supreme Court in deciding any one or more cases fixes of itself irrevokably [sic] and permanently its construction in that particular and binds the states and the Legislative and executive branches of the General government, forever afterwards to conform to it and adopt it in every other case as the true reading of the instrument although all of them may unite in believing it erroneous.[50]
Frederick Douglass, a prominent black abolitionist who considered the decision to be unconstitutional and Taney's reasoning contrary to the Founding Fathers' vision, predicted that political conflict could not be avoided:The highest authority has spoken. The voice of the Supreme Court has gone out over the troubled waves of the National Conscience.... [But] my hopes were never brighter than now. I have no fear that the National Conscience will be put to sleep by such an open, glaring, and scandalous tissue of lies....[51]
According to Jefferson Davis, then a U.S. Senator from Mississippi, and future President of the Confederate States of America, the case merely "presented the question whether Cuffee [a derogatory term for a black person] should be kept in his normal condition or not . . . [and] whether the Congress of the United States could decide what might or might not be property in a Territory the case being that of an officer of the army sent into a Territory to perform his public duty, having taken with him his negro slave".[52]
Impact on both parties[edit]
Irene Emerson moved to Massachusetts in 1850 and married Calvin C. Chaffee, a doctor and abolitionist who was elected to Congress on the Know Nothing and Republican tickets. Following the Supreme Court ruling, pro-slavery newspapers attacked Chaffee as a hypocrite. Chaffee protested that Dred Scott belonged to his brother-in-law and that he had nothing to do with Scott's enslavement.[34] Nevertheless, the Chaffees executed a deed transferring the Scott family to Henry Taylor Blow, the son of Scott's former owner, Peter Blow. Chaffee s lawyer suggested the transfer as the most convenient way of freeing Scott since Missouri law required manumitters to appear in person before the court.[34]
Taylor Blow filed the manumission papers with Judge Hamilton on May 26, 1857. The emancipation of Dred Scott and his family was national news and was celebrated in northern cities. Scott worked as a porter in a hotel in St. Louis, where he was a minor celebrity. His wife took in laundry. Dred Scott died of tuberculosis on November 7, 1858. Harriet died on June 17, 1876.[20]
Aftermath[edit]
Part of a series onSlavery
Contemporary
Child labour
Child soldiers
Conscription
Debt
Forced marriage
Bride buying
Child marriage
Wife selling
Forced prostitution
Human trafficking
Peonage
Penal labour
Contemporary Africa
21st-century jihadism
Sexual slavery
Wage slavery
Historical
Antiquity
Ancient Egypt
Babylonia
Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Contubernium
Ancillae
Medieval Europe
Byzantine Empire
Kholop
Serfs
History
In Russia
Emancipation
Thrall
Muslim world
Contract of manumission
Ottoman Empire
Avret Esir Pazarlar 
Barbary Coast
slave trade
pirates
Turkish Abductions
Concubinage
history
Ma malakat aymanukum
Avret Esir Pazarlar 
Harem
Abbasid harem
Ottoman Imperial Harem
Jarya/Cariye
Odalisque
Qiyan
Umm walad
21st century
Atlantic slave trade
Bristol
Brazil
Database
Dutch
Middle Passage
Nantes
New France
Panyarring
Spanish Empire
Slave Coast
Thirteen colonies
Topics and practice
Conscription
Ghilman
Mamluk
Devshirme
Blackbirding
Coolie
Corv e labor
Field slaves in the United States
Treatment
House slaves
Saqaliba
Slave market
Slave raiding
Child soldiers
White slavery
Naval
Galley slave
Impressment
Pirates
Shanghaiing
Slave ship
By country or region
Sub-Saharan Africa
Contemporary Africa
Trans-Saharan slave trade
Indian Ocean slave trade
Angola
Chad
Ethiopia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Nigeria
Seychelles
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
North and South America
Americas indigenous
U.S. Natives
Aztec
United States
Field slaves
female
Contemporary
maps
partus
prison labor
Slave codes
Treatment
interregional
Human trafficking
The Bahamas
Canada
Caribbean
Barbados
British Virgin Islands
Trinidad
Code Noir
Latin America
Brazil
Lei  urea
Colombia
Cuba
Haiti
revolt
Restavek
(Encomienda)
Puerto Rico
East, Southeast, and South Asia
Human trafficking in Southeast Asia
Bhutan
China
Booi Aha
Laogai
penal system
India
Debt bondage
Chukri System
Japan
comfort women
Korea
Kwalliso
Thailand
Yankee princess
Vietnam
Australia and Oceania
Australia
Human trafficking
Blackbirding
Slave raiding in Easter Island
Human trafficking in Papua New Guinea
Blackbirding in Polynesia
Europe and North Asia
Sex trafficking in Europe
Britain
Denmark
Dutch Republic
Germany in World War II
Malta
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain
Sweden
North Africa and West Asia
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Egypt
Human trafficking in the Middle East
Iran
Kuwait
Libya
Morocco
Oman
Saudi Arabia
Tunisia
Qatar
Yemen
United Arab Emirates
Religion
Bible
Christianity
Catholicism
Mormonism
Islam
Judaism
Bah  Faith
Opposition and resistance
1926 Slavery Convention
Abolitionism
U.K.
U.S.
Abolitionists
Anti-Slavery International
Blockade of Africa
U.K.
U.S.
Colonization
Liberia
Sierra Leone
Compensated emancipation
Freedman
manumission
Freedom suit
Slave Power
Underground Railroad
songs
Slave rebellion
Slave Trade Acts
International law
Third Servile War
13th Amendment to the United States Constitution
Timeline of abolition of slavery and serfdom
Abolition of slave trade in Persian gulf [fa]
Related
Common law
Indentured servitude
Unfree labour
Fugitive slaves
laws
Great Dismal Swamp maroons
List of slaves
owners
last surviving American enslaved people
Marriage of enslaved people (United States)
Slave narrative
films
songs
Slave name
Slave catcher
Slave patrol
Slave Route Project
breeding
court cases
Washington
Jefferson
Adams
Lincoln
40 acres
Freedmen's Bureau
Iron bit
Emancipation Day
vte
Economic[edit]
Economist Charles Calomiris and historian Larry Schweikart discovered that uncertainty about whether the entire West would suddenly become slave territory or engulfed in combat like
"Bleeding Kansas" gripped the markets immediately. The east west railroads collapsed immediately (although north south lines were unaffected), causing, in turn, the near-collapse of several large banks and the runs that ensued. What followed the runs has been called the Panic of 1857.
The Panic of 1857, unlike the Panic of 1837, almost exclusively impacted the North, a fact that Calomiris and Schweikart attribute to the South's system of branch banking, as opposed to the North's system of unit banking.  In the South's branch banking system, information moved reliably among the branch banks and transmission of the panic was minor.  Northern unit banks, in contrast, were competitors and seldom shared such vital information.[53]
Political[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Dred Scott v. Sandford" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Southerners, who had grown uncomfortable with the Kansas-Nebraska Act, argued that they had a constitutional right to bring slaves into the territories, regardless of any decision by a territorial legislature on the subject. The Dred Scott decision seemed to endorse that view.
Although Taney believed that the decision represented a compromise that would be a final settlement of the slavery question by transforming a contested political issue into a matter of settled law, the decision produced the opposite result. It strengthened Northern opposition to slavery, divided the Democratic Party on sectional lines, encouraged secessionist elements among Southern supporters of slavery to make bolder demands, and strengthened the Republican Party.
In 1860, the Republican Party explicitly rejected the Dred Scott verdict in their official platform, stating "the new dogma that the Constitution, of its own force, carries slavery into any or all of the territories of the United States, is a dangerous political heresy, at variance with the explicit provisions of that instrument itself, with contemporaneous exposition, and with legislative and judicial precedent; is revolutionary in its tendency, and subversive of the peace and harmony of the country."[54]
Later references[edit]
In 1859, when defending John Anthony Copeland and Shields Green from the charge of treason, following their participation in John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry, their attorney, George Sennott, cited the Dred Scott decision in arguing successfully that since they were not citizens according to that Supreme Court ruling, they could not commit treason.[55] The charge of treason was dropped, but they were found guilty and executed on other charges.
Justice John Marshall Harlan was the lone dissenting vote in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), which declared racial segregation constitutional and created the concept of "separate but equal". In his dissent, Harlan wrote that the majority's opinion would "prove to be quite as pernicious as the decision made by this tribunal in the Dred Scott case".[56]
Charles Evans Hughes, writing in 1927 on the Supreme Court's history, described Dred Scott v. Sandford as a "self-inflicted wound" from which the court would not recover for many years.[57][58][59]
In a memo to Justice Robert H. Jackson in 1952, for whom he was clerking, on the subject of Brown v. Board of Education, the future Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote that "Scott v. Sandford was the result of Taney's effort to protect slaveholders from legislative interference."[60]
Justice Antonin Scalia made the comparison between Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992) and Dred Scott in an effort to see Roe v. Wade overturned:
Dred Scott ... rested upon the concept of "substantive due process" that the Court praises and employs today. Indeed, Dred Scott was very possibly the first application of substantive due process in the Supreme Court, the original precedent for... Roe v. Wade.[61]
Scalia noted that the Dred Scott decision had been written and championed by Taney and left the justice's reputation irrevocably tarnished. Taney, who was attempting to end the disruptive question of the future of slavery, wrote a decision that "inflamed the national debate over slavery and deepened the divide that led ultimately to the American Civil War".[62]
Chief Justice John Roberts compared Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) to Dred Scott, as another example of trying to settle a contentious issue through a ruling that went beyond the scope of the Constitution.[63]
Legacy[edit]
1977: The Scotts' great-grandson John A. Madison, Jr., an attorney, gave the invocation at the ceremony at the Old Courthouse in St. Louis, a National Historic Landmark, for the dedication of a National Historic Marker commemorating the Scotts' case tried there.[64]
2000: Harriet and Dred Scott's petition papers in their freedom suit were displayed at the main branch of the St. Louis Public Library, following the discovery of more than 300 freedom suits in the archives of the U.S. circuit court.[65]
2006: A new historic plaque was erected at the Old Courthouse to honor the active roles of both Dred and Harriet Scott in their freedom suit and the case's significance in U.S. history.[66]
2012: A monument depicting Dred and Harriet Scott was erected at the Old Courthouse's east entrance facing the St. Louis Gateway Arch.[67]
See also[edit]
Anticanon
American slave court cases
Origins of the American Civil War
Timeline of the civil rights movement
Notes[edit]
^ a b John Sandford's surname was actually "Sanford". A Supreme Court clerk of court misspelled his name in 1856 and the error was never corrected.[1]
^ Legal historian Walter Ehrlich implies that the custody order applied only to Dred Scott, while Don Fehrenbacher suggests that it applied to both Dred and Harriet.
References[edit]
Citations[edit]
^ Vishneski (1988), p. 373, note 1.
^ a b Chemerinsky (2019), p. 722.
^ a b Nowak & Rotunda (2012),  18.6.
^ Hall, Kermit (1992). Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court of the United States. Oxford University Press. p. 889. ISBN 9780195176612. American legal and constitutional scholars consider the Dred Scott decision to be the worst ever rendered by the Supreme Court. Historians have abundantly documented its role in crystallizing attitudes that led to war. Taney's opinion stands as a model of censurable judicial craft and failed judicial statesmanship.
^ Urofsky, Melvin (January 5, 2023). "Dred Scott decision | Definition, History, Summary, Significance, & Facts | Britannica". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved February 3, 2023. Among constitutional scholars, Scott v. Sandford is widely considered the worst decision ever rendered by the Supreme Court. It has been cited in particular as the most egregious example in the court's history of wrongly imposing a judicial solution on a political problem. A later chief justice, Charles Evans Hughes, famously characterized the decision as the court's great "self-inflicted wound."
^ Staff (October 14, 2015). "13 Worst Supreme Court Decisions of All Time". FindLaw. Retrieved June 10, 2021.
^ Bernard Schwartz (1997). A Book of Legal Lists: The Best and Worst in American Law. Oxford University Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0198026945.
^ Chemerinsky (2019), p. 723.
^ Carrafiello, Michael L. (Spring 2010). "Diplomatic Failure: James Buchanan's Inaugural Address". Pennsylvania History. 77 (2): 145 165. doi:10.5325/pennhistory.77.2.0145. JSTOR 10.5325/pennhistory.77.2.0145.
^ Gregory J. Wallance, "The Lawsuit That Started the Civil War." Civil War Times 45: 46 52. 
^ Roberta Alexander, "Dred Scott: The decision that sparked a civil war." Northern Kentucky Law Review 34 (2007): 643+ excerpt. 
^ David W, Blight, "Was the Civil War Inevitable?"  The New York Times Dec. 22, 2022
^ ""No Rights Which the White Man was Bound to Respect": The Dred Scott Decision | ACS". March 19, 2007. Retrieved January 9, 2023.
^ "What defines judicial activism? Not being an activist, says Kermit Roosevelt". Penn Today. Retrieved January 9, 2023.
^ ""No Rights Which the White Man was Bound to Respect": The Dred Scott Decision | ACS". March 19, 2007. Retrieved January 9, 2023.
^ Dred Scott and the Dangers of a Political Court.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Chemerinsky (2019),  9.3.1, p. 750.
^ Melvin I. Urofsky, Dred Scott  at the Encyclop dia Britannica
^ Earl M. Maltz, Dred Scott and the Politics of Slavery (2007)
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Missouri's Dred Scott Case, 1846 1857". Missouri Digital Heritage: African American History Initiative. Retrieved July 15, 2015.
^ a b c d e f g Finkelman (2007).
^ a b c Don E. Fehrenbacher, The Dred Scott Case: Its Significance in American Law and Politics (2001)
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av Ehrlich, Walter (2007). They Have No Rights: Dred Scott's Struggle for Freedom. Applewood Books.
^ a b c d e VanderVelde, Lea (2009). Mrs. Dred Scott: A Life on Slavery's Frontier. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195366563.
^ 1 Mo. 472, 475 (Mo. 1824).
^ 4 Mo. 350 (Mo. 1836).
^ Gardner, Eric (Spring 2007). "'You Have No Business to Whip Me': The Freedom Suits of Polly Wash and Lucy Ann Delaney". African American Review. 41 (1): 40, 47. JSTOR 40033764.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Fehrenbacher, Don Edward (1981). Slavery, Law and Politics: The Dred Scott Case in Historical Perspective. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195028821.
^ a b Lawson, John, ed. (1921). American State Trials. Vol. 13. St. Louis: Thomas Law Book Company. pp. 237 238.
^ Finkelman, Paul (December 2006). "Scott v. Sandford: The Court's Most Dreadful Case and How It Changed History". Chicago-Kent Law Review. 82 (1): 25   via Scholarly Commons @ IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law.
^ a b c d e f g h i Boman, Dennis K. (2000). "The Dred Scott Case Reconsidered: The Legal and Political Context in Missouri". American Journal of Legal History. 44 (4): 421, 423 424, 426. doi:10.2307/3113785. JSTOR 3113785.
^ a b "Scott v. Emerson, 15 Mo. 576 (1852)". Caselaw Access Project, Harvard Law School. Retrieved April 1, 2022.
^ a b c Ehrlich, Walter (September 1968). "Was the Dred Scott Case Valid?". The Journal of American History. Organization of American Historians. 55 (2): 256 265. doi:10.2307/1899556. JSTOR 1899556.
^ a b c d Hardy, David T. (2012). "Dred Scott, John San(d)ford, and the Case for Collusion" (PDF). Northern Kentucky Law Review. 41 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 10, 2015.
^ Maltz, Earl M. (2007). Dred Scott and the politics of slavery. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. p. 115. ISBN 978-0700615025.
^ Faragher, John Mack;  et al. (2005). Out of Many: A History of the American People (Revised Printing (4th Ed) ed.). Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall. p. 388. ISBN 0131951300.
^ Paul Finkelman, "Scott v. Sandford: The Court's most dreadful case and how it changed history." Chicago-Kent Law Review 82 (2007):  pp. 3 48 at p. 46.
^ Baker, Jean H. (2004). James Buchanan: The American Presidents Series: The 15th President, 1857 1861. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0805069464.
^ "James Buchanan: Inaugural Address. U.S. Inaugural Addresses. 1989". Bartleby.com. Retrieved July 26, 2012.
^ a b c d e f Nowak & Rotunda (2012),  18.6.
^ Quoted in part in Chemerinsky (2019),  9.3.1, p. 750
^ Chemerinsky (2019),  9.3.1, p. 750, quoting Dred Scott, 60 U.S. at 409.
^ Chemerinsky (2019),  9.3.1, pp. 750 51.
^ (Dred Scott v. Sanford, 60 U.S. 149.)
^ a b c McCloskey (2010), p. 62.
^ "Dred Scott v. Sanford (1857) Excerpts From Majority and Dissenting Opinions". Bill of Rights Institute.
^ "Digital History". www.digitalhistory.uh.edu. Retrieved June 12, 2019.
^ "Abraham Lincoln's Cooper Union Address". www.abrahamlincolnonline.org.
^ "Speech at Springfield, June 26, 1857".
^ Don E. Fehrenbacher (1978/2001), The Dred Scott Case: Its Significance in American Law and Politics, reprint, New York: Oxford, Part 3, "Consequences and Echoes", Chapter 18, "The Judges Judged", p. 441; unpublished opinion, transcript in Carl B. Swisher Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress.
^ Finkleman, Paul (1997). Dred Scott vs. Sandford: A Brief History with Documents. ISBN 978-0312128074   via Google Boeken.
^ Address to the United States Senate on May 7, 1860, reprinted as Appendix F to Davis, Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government (1880).
^ Charles Calomiris and Larry Schweikart, "The Panic of 1857: Origins, Transmission, Containment", Journal of Economic History, LI, December 1990, pp. 807 34.
^ May 17, 1860. "Republican Party Platform of 1860 | The American Presidency Project". Presidency.ucsb.edu. Retrieved August 19, 2022.
^ Lubet, Steven (June 1, 2013). "Execution in Virginia, 1859: The Trials of Green and Copeland". North Carolina Law Review. 91 (5).
^ Fehrenbacher, p. 580.
^ Hughes, Charles Evans (1936) [1928]. The Supreme Court of the United States. Columbia University Press. pp. 50 51. ISBN 978-0231085670.
^ "Introduction to the court opinion on the Dred Scott case". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved July 16, 2015.
^ "Remarks of the Chief Justice". Supreme Court of the United States. March 21, 2003. Retrieved November 22, 2007.
^ Rehnquist, William. "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases" Archived 2008-09-21 at the Wayback Machine
^ Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992). FindLaw.
^ Carey, Patrick W. (April 2002). "Political Atheism: Dred Scott, Roger Brooke Taney, and Orestes A. Brownson". The Catholic Historical Review. The Catholic University of America Press. 88 (2): 207 229. doi:10.1353/cat.2002.0072. ISSN 1534-0708. S2CID 153950640.
^ Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015).
^ Arenson, Adam (2010), "Dred Scott versus the Dred Scott Case", The Dred Scott Case: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on Race and Law, Ohio University Press, p. 36, ISBN 978-0821419120
^ Arenson (2010), p. 38
^ Arenson (2010), p. 39
^ Patrick, Robert (August 18, 2015). "St. Louis judges want sculpture to honor slaves who sought freedom here". stltoday.com. Retrieved September 2, 2018. Attendees get their first look after the unveiling of the new Dred and Harriet Scott statue on the grounds of the Old Courthouse in downtown St. Louis on Friday, June 8, 2012.
Works cited[edit]
Arenson, Adam (2010). "Dred Scott Versus the Dred Scott Case".  In Konig, David Thomas; Finkelman, Paul; Bracey, Christopher Alan (eds.). The Dred Scott Case: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on Race and Law. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press. ISBN 978-0821419120.
Chemerinsky, Erwin (2019). Constitutional Law: Principles and Policies (6th ed.). New York: Wolters Kluwer. ISBN 978-1454895749.
Ehrlich, Walter (1968). "Was the Dred Scott Case Valid?". The Journal of American History. 55 (2): 256 265. doi:10.2307/1899556. JSTOR 1899556.
Finkelman, Paul (2007). "Scott v. Sandford: The Court's Most Dreadful Case and How it Changed History" (PDF). Chicago-Kent Law Review. 82 (3): 3 48.
Hughes, Charles Evans (1936) [1928]. The Supreme Court of the United States. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0231085670.
McCloskey, Robert G. (2010). The American Supreme Court. Revised by Sanford Levinson (5th ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0226556864.
Nowak, John E.; Rotunda, Ronald D. (2012). Treatise on Constitutional Law: Substance and Procedure (5th ed.). Eagan, MN: West Thomson/Reuters. OCLC 798148265.
Vishneski, John S. (1988). "What the Court Decided in Dred Scott v. Sandford". American Journal of Legal History. 32 (4): 373 390. doi:10.2307/845743. JSTOR 845743.
Further reading[edit]
Allen, Austin. Origins of the Dred Scott Case: Jacksonian Jurisprudence and the Supreme Court 1837-1857. Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press, 2006.
Dennis-Jonathan Mann & Kai P. Purnhagen: The Nature of Union Citizenship between Autonomy and Dependency on (Member) State Citizenship  A Comparative Analysis of the Rottmann Ruling, or: How to Avoid a European Dred Scott Decision?, in: 29:3 Wisconsin International Law Journal (WILJ), (Fall 2011), pp. 484 533 (PDF).
Fehrenbacher, Don E., The Dred Scott Case: Its Significance in American Law and Politics. New York:  Oxford (1978) [winner of Pulitzer Prize for History].
Fehrenbacher, Don E. Slavery, Law, and Politics: The Dred Scott Case in Historical Perspective (1981) [abridged version of The Dred Scott Case].
Finkelman, Paul. Supreme Injustice: Slavery in the Nation's Highest Court. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: Harvard University Press, 2018. Review
Konig, David Thomas, Paul Finkelman, and Christopher Alan Bracey, eds. The Dred Scott Case: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on Race and Law (Ohio University Press; 2010) 272 pages; essays by scholars on the history of the case and its afterlife in American law and society.
Potter, David M. The Impending Crisis, 1848 1861 (1976) pp. 267 96.
VanderVelde, Lea.  Mrs. Dred Scott: A Life on Slavery's Frontier (Oxford University Press, 2009) 480 pp.
Swain, Gwenyth (2004). Dred and Harriet Scott: A Family's Struggle for Freedom. Saint Paul, MN: Borealis Books. ISBN 978-0873514828.
Tushnet, Mark (2008). I Dissent: Great Opposing Opinions in Landmark Supreme Court Cases. Boston: Beacon Press. pp. 31 44. ISBN 978-0807000366.
Listen to: American Pendulum II    Listen Now: American Pendulum II
External links[edit]
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Wikiquote has quotations related to Dred Scott v. Sandford.
 Texts on Wikisource:
Dred Scott v. Sandford
"Dred Scott Case". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.
"Dred Scott Case". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.
Text of Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857) is available from: Cornell Findlaw Justia Library of Congress OpenJurist Oyez (oral argument audio) 
The Dred Scott decision. Opinion of Chief Justice Taney, with an introduction by Dr. J. H. Van Evrie. Also, an appendix, containing an essay on the natural history of the prognathous race of mankind, originally written for the New York Day-book, by Dr. S. A. Cartwright, of New Orleans. New York: Van Evrie, Horton & Co. 1863.
Primary documents and bibliography about the Dred Scott case, from the Library of Congress
"Dred Scott decision", Encyclop dia Britannica 2006. Encyclop dia Britannica Online. 17 December 2006. www.yowebsite.com
Gregory J. Wallance, "Dred Scott Decision: The Lawsuit That Started The Civil War", History.net, originally in Civil War Times Magazine, March/April 2006
Jefferson National Expansion Memorial, National Park Service
Infography about the Dred Scott Case
The Dred Scott Case Collection, Washington University in St. Louis
Report of the Brown University Steering Committee on Slavery and Justice
Dred Scott case articles from William Lloyd Garrison's abolitionist newspaper The Liberator
"Supreme Court Landmark Case Dred Scott v. Sandford" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Report of the Decision of the Supreme Court of the United States and the Opinions of the Judges Thereof, in the Case of Dred Scott Versus John F.A. Sandford. December Term, 1856 via Google Books
vteUnited States Fifth Amendment case lawGrand Jury Clause
Hurtado v. California (1884)
Ex parte Bain (1887)
Wong Wing v. United States (1896)
Maxwell v. Dow (1900)
United States v. Moreland (1922)
Double Jeopardy ClauseAfter acquittal
United States v. Randenbush (1834)
Ball v. United States (1896)
Burton v. United States (1906)
Fong Foo v. United States (1962)
Ashe v. Swenson (1970)
Burks v. United States (1978)
After conviction
United States v. Wilson (1833)
Ludwig v. Massachusetts (1976)
Grady v. Corbin (1990)
United States v. Felix (1992)
United States v. Dixon (1993)
After mistrial
United States v. Perez (1824)
United States v. Dinitz (1976)
Oregon v. Kennedy (1982)
Blueford v. Arkansas (2012)
Multiple punishment
Blockburger v. United States (1932)
Dual sovereignty doctrine
United States v. Lanza (1922)
Bartkus v. Illinois (1959)
Waller v. Florida (1970)
United States v. Wheeler (1978)
Heath v. Alabama (1985)
United States v. Lara (2004)
Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle (2016)
Gamble v. United States (2019)
Denezpi v. United States (2022)
Other
Ex parte Bigelow (1885)
Palko v. Connecticut (1937)
Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber (1947)
Baxstrom v. Herold (1966)
North Carolina v. Pearce (1969)
Benton v. Maryland (1969)
Self-Incrimination Clause
Griffin v. California (1965)
Miranda v. Arizona (1966)
Williams v. Florida (1970)
Edwards v. Arizona (1981)
McNeil v. Wisconsin (1991)
Mitchell v. United States (1999)
United States v. Hubbell (2000)
Dickerson v. United States (2000)
Chavez v. Martinez (2003)
Yarborough v. Alvarado (2004)
Missouri v. Seibert (2004)
United States v. Patane (2004)
Corley v. United States (2009)
Florida v. Powell (2010)
Maryland v. Shatzer (2010)
Berghuis v. Thompkins (2010)
J. D. B. v. North Carolina (2011)
Bobby v. Dixon (2011)
Howes v. Fields (2012)
Salinas v. Texas (2013)
Vega v. Tekoh (2022)
Due Process Clause
Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
Adair v. United States (1908)
Adkins v. Children's Hospital (1923)
Nichols v. Coolidge (1927)
Railroad Retirement Board v. Alton Railroad Co. (1935)
United States v. Carolene Products Co. (1938)
Bolling v. Sharpe (1954)
Frontiero v. Richardson (1973)
Department of Agriculture v. Moreno (1973)
Morton v. Mancari (1974)
Schlesinger v. Ballard (1975)
Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld (1975)
Washington v. Davis (1976)
Califano v. Goldfarb (1977)
Califano v. Webster (1977)
United States v. Antelope (1977)
Fiallo v. Bell (1977)
Califano v. Torres (1978)
Califano v. Westcott (1979)
Harris v. Rosario (1980)
Harris v. McRae (1980)
Fullilove v. Klutznick (1980)
Rostker v. Goldberg (1981)
Heckler v. Mathews (1984)
Lyng v. Castillo (1986)
Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC (1990)
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pe a (1995)
Miller v. Albright (1998)
Nguyen v. INS (2001)
Zadvydas v. Davis (2001)
Flores-Villar v. United States (2011)
United States v. Windsor (2013)
Kerry v. Din (2015)
Sessions v. Morales-Santana (2017)
Department of Homeland Security v. Regents of the University of California (2020)
United States v. Vaello Madero (2022)
Takings Clause
Barron v. Baltimore (1833)
Kohl v. United States (1875)
United States v. Lawton (1884)
Cole v. City of La Grange (1885)
Head v. Amoskeag Manufacturing Co. (1885)
Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co. v. City of Chicago (1897)
Peabody v. United States (1913)
United States v. Cress (1917)
Block v. Hirsh (1921)
Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon (1922)
Leonard v. Earle (1929)
Louisville Joint Stock Land Bank v. Radford (1935)
United States v. Causby (1946)
Kimball Laundry Co. v. United States (1949)
United States v. Pewee Coal Co. (1951)
Berman v. Parker (1954)
Nelson v. City of New York (1956)
United States v. Dow (1958)
Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City (1978)
Kaiser Aetna v. United States (1979)
Agins v. City of Tiburon (1980)
Webb's Fabulous Pharmacies, Inc. v. Beckwith (1980)
Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp. (1982)
Hawaii Housing Authority v. Midkiff (1984)
Williamson County Regional Planning Commission v. Hamilton Bank of Johnson City (1985)
United States v. Riverside Bayview (1985)
Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n v. DeBenedictis (1987)
Hodel v. Irving (1987)
First English Evangelical Lutheran Church v. Los Angeles County (1987)
Nollan v. California Coastal Commission (1987)
Pennell v. City of San Jose (1988)
Preseault v. Interstate Commerce Commission (1990)
Yee v. City of Escondido (1992)
Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council (1992)
Dolan v. City of Tigard (1994)
Suitum v. Tahoe Regional Planning Agency (1997)
Phillips v. Washington Legal Foundation (1998)
Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel (1998)
Palazzolo v. Rhode Island (2001)
Tahoe-Sierra Preservation Council, Inc. v. Tahoe Regional Planning Agency (2002)
Brown v. Legal Foundation of Washington (2003)
Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc. (2005)
San Remo Hotel, L.P. v. City & County of San Francisco (2005)
Kelo v. City of New London (2005)
Stop the Beach Renourishment v. Florida Department of Environmental Protection (2010)
Arkansas Game & Fish Commission v. United States (2012)
Horne v. Department of Agriculture I (2013)
Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management District (2013)
Horne v. Department of Agriculture II (2015)
Murr v. Wisconsin (2017)
Knick v. Township of Scott, Pennsylvania (2019)
Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid (2021)
Pakdel v. City and County of San Francisco (2021)
Tyler v. Hennepin County, Minnesota (2023)
vteMissouri in the American Civil WarOrigins
Liberty Arsenal
Capture of Camp Jackson
Harney Price Convention
Combatants
Confederacy
Union
Campaigns
Shelby's Raid
Price's Missouri Expedition
Battles1861
Boonville
Cole Camp
Carthage
Battle of Dug Springs
Athens
Wilson's Creek
Dry Wood Creek
1st Lexington
Blue Mills Landing
Fredericktown
1st Springfield
Belmont
Blackwater Creek
Mount Zion Church
1862
Roan's Tan Yard
New Madrid
Moore's Mill
Kirksville
1st Independence
Lone Jack
1st Newtonia
Island Mound
Clark's Mill
1863
2nd Springfield
Hartville
Cape Girardeau
Chalk Bluff
1864
Fort Davidson
Sedalia
Glasgow
2nd Lexington
Little Blue
2nd Independence
Big Blue
Westport
Marmiton River
2nd Newtonia
Involvement(by city or town)
Centralia
Osceola
St. Louis
LeadersConfederate
John S. Marmaduke
Sterling Price
Joseph O. Shelby
Union
Samuel R. Curtis
Thomas Ewing Jr.
Nathaniel Lyon
AftermathMonuments andmemorials
Athens
Carthage
Fort Davidson
Island Mound
Lexington
Newtonia
First Newtonia
Second Newtonia
Wilson's Creek
Cemeteries
Confederate Home
Related topics
General Order 11
Bleeding Kansas
 Category
 Commons
vteAmerican Civil WarOriginsOrigins
Timeline leading to the War
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Kansas-Nebraska Act
Lincoln Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Origins of the American Civil War
Panic of 1857
Popular sovereignty
Secession
South Carolina Declaration of Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
Slavery
African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Crittenden Compromise
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Emancipation Proclamation
Fire-Eaters
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Positive good
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Abolitionism
Abolitionism in the United States
Susan B. Anthony
James G. Birney
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Lane Debates on Slavery
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Caning
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad
CombatantsTheatersCampaignsBattlesStatesCombatantsUnion
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service
Confederacy
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Theaters
Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade
Major campaigns
Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin Nashville
Price's Missouri Expedition
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Mobile
Appomattox
Major battles
Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Fort Pillow
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Crater
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks
Involvement(by state or territory)
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Dakota Territory
District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indian Territory
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
Ohio
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Involvement(cities)
Atlanta
Charleston
Chattanooga
New Orleans
Richmond
Washington, D.C.
Winchester
LeadersConfederateMilitary
R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Polk
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler
Civilian
Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens
UnionMilitary
Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Fr mont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas
Civilian
Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles
AftermathConstitution
Reconstruction Amendments
13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment
Reconstruction
Alabama Claims
Brooks Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax riot of 1873
Compromise of 1877
Confederate refugees
Confederados
Eufaula riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Homestead Acts
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
trial
efforts
timeline
first inquiry
second inquiry
impeachment managers investigation
Kirk Holden war
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Ethnic violence
Memphis riots of 1866
Meridian riot of 1871
New Orleans riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867
South Carolina riots of 1876
Reconstruction acts
Habeas Corpus Act of 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871
Reconstruction era
Reconstruction military districts
Reconstruction Treaties
Indian Council at Fort Smith
Red Shirts
Redeemers
Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
White League
Post-Reconstruction
Commemoration
Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate Memorial Day
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day
Confederate Memorial Hall
Disenfranchisement
Black Codes
Jim Crow
Historiographic issues
Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Red Shirts
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Confederate Veterans
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Children of the Confederacy
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Monumentsand memorials
Union: List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln
Confederate:
Confederate artworks in the United States Capitol
List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Cemeteries
Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' Memorial Associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries
Veterans
1913 Gettysburg reunion
1938 Gettysburg reunion
Confederate Memorial Hall
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans
Related topicsMilitary
Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate revolving cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad
Political
Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States presidential election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Politicians killed
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union Leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats
Music
Battle Hymn of the Republic
Dixie
John Brown's Body
A Lincoln Portrait
Marching Through Georgia
Maryland, My Maryland
When Johnny Comes Marching Home
Daar kom die Alibama
Other topics
Baltimore riot of 1861
Battlefield preservation
Bibliography
Confederate war finance
Confederate States dollar
Espionage
Confederate Secret Service
Great Revival of 1863
Juneteenth
Naming the war
Native Americans
Catawba
Cherokee
Choctaw
Seminole
New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City riots of 1863
Photographers
Richmond riots of 1863
Gender issues
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission
Women soldiers
 Category
 Portal
vteTaney Court (1836 1864)Justices
Taney
Barbour
Catron
McKinley
Daniel
Nelson
Woodbury
Grier
Curtis
Campbell
Clifford
Swayne
Miller
Davis
Field
DecisionsBy volumePet.
35 (10)
36 (11)
37 (12)
38 (13)
39 (14)
40 (15)
41 (16)
How.
42 (1)
43 (2)
44 (3)
45 (4)
46 (5)
47 (6)
48 (7)
49 (8)
50 (9)
51 (10)
52 (11)
53 (12)
54 (13)
55 (14)
56 (15)
57 (16)
58 (17)
59 (18)
60 (19)
61 (20)
62 (21)
63 (22)
64 (23)
65 (24)
Black
66 (1)
67 (2)
Wall.
68 (1)
By topic
Aboriginal title
Criminal law
Landmark
Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge (1837)
United States v. The Amistad (1841)
Luther v. Borden (1849)
Cooley v. Board of Wardens (1852)
Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
Ableman v. Booth (1859)
Prize Cases (1863)
Statutes
Eighth and Ninth Circuits Act of 1837
Tenth Circuit Act of 1863
vteAfrican AmericansHistory
Timeline
Abolitionism
African American founding fathers
Afrocentrism
American Civil War
Atlantic slave trade
Black genocide
Black Lives Matter
Brown v. Board of Education (1954)
Children of the plantation
Civil Rights Acts
1964
Voting Rights Act of 1965
1968
Civil rights movement 1865 1896
Civil right movement 1896 1954
Civil rights movement 1954 1968
Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle (1956)
Sit-in movement
Freedom Riders
Birmingham movement
March on Washington
Selma to Montgomery marches
Chicago Freedom Movement
Post civil rights era
Cornerstone Speech
COVID-19 impact
Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
Free Negro
Free people of color
George Floyd protests
Great Migration
Second
New
Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013
Jim Crow laws
Lynching
Military history
Nadir of American race relations
The Negro Motorist Green Book
Partus sequitur ventrem
Plantations
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Reconstruction Amendments
Reconstruction era
Redlining
Separate but equal
Slavery
Treatment of slaves
Tulsa race massacre
Underground Railroad
Women's suffrage movement
Culture
Afrofuturism
Art
Black mecca
Businesses
Dance
Family structure
Film
Folktales
Hair
Harlem Renaissance
New Negro
Juneteenth
Kwanzaa
LGBT community
Literature
Music
Musical theater
Names
Negro National Anthem
Neighborhoods
Newspapers
Soul food
Stereotypes
Middle class
Upper class
Notable people
Ralph Abernathy
Maya Angelou
Crispus Attucks
James Baldwin
James Bevel
Julian Bond
Amelia Boynton
James Bradley
Carol Moseley Braun
Edward Brooke
Blanche Bruce
Ralph Bunche
George Washington Carver
Shirley Chisholm
Claudette Colvin
Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois
Medgar Evers
James Farmer
Henry Highland Garnet
Marcus Garvey
Fred Gray
Fannie Lou Hamer
Kamala Harris
Jimi Hendrix
Jesse Jackson
Ketanji Brown Jackson
Michael Jackson
Harriet Jacobs
Barbara Jordan
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Huddie Ledbetter
John Lewis
Joseph Lowery
Malcolm X
Thurgood Marshall
Toni Morrison
Bob Moses
Diane Nash
Barack Obama
Michelle Obama
Rosa Parks
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Colin Powell
Gabriel Prosser
Joseph Rainey
A. Philip Randolph
Hiram Revels
Paul Robeson
Al Sharpton
Fred Shuttlesworth
Clarence Thomas
Emmett Till
Sojourner Truth
Harriet Tubman
Nat Turner
Denmark Vesey
C. T. Vivian
David Walker
Booker T. Washington
Ida B. Wells
Roy Wilkins
Oprah Winfrey
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Education, scienceand technology
Black studies
Black schools
Historically black colleges and universities
Inventors and scientists
Museums
Women
in computer science
in medicine
in STEM fields
Religion
African-American Jews
Islam
American Society of Muslims
Nation of Islam
Black church
Azusa Street Revival
Black Hebrew Israelites
Black theology
Doctrine of Father Divine
Political movements
Anarchism
Back-to-Africa movement
Black power
Movement
Capitalism
Conservatism
Leftism
Pan-Africanism
Populism
Raised fist
Self-determination
Nationalism
Socialism
Civic and economicgroups
Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)
Black Panther Party
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
Nashville Student Movement
National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC)
National Council of Negro Women (NCNW)
National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)
National Urban League (NUL)
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
Thurgood Marshall College Fund
United Negro College Fund (UNCF)
Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL)
Sports
Negro league baseball
Baseball color line
Black players in professional American football
Black NFL quarterbacks
Black players in ice hockey
Muhammad Ali
Arthur Ashe
Jack Johnson
Joe Louis
Jesse Owens
Jackie Robinson
Serena Williams
Athletic associationsand conferences
Central (CIAA)
Mid-Eastern (MEAC)
Southern (SIAC)
Southwestern (SWAC)
Ethnic subdivisions
By African descent
Fula
Gullah
Igbo
Yoruba
Black Indians
Black Seminoles
Cherokee freedmen controversy
Choctaw freedmen
Creek Freedmen
Black Southerners
Blaxicans
Louisiana Creole
of color
Melungeon
Demographics
Neighborhoods
list
U.S. cities with large populations
2000 majorities
2010 majorities
Metropolitan areas
States and territories
Languages
English
American English
African-American English
African-American Vernacular English
Gullah
Louisiana Creole
By state/city
Alabama
Arkansas
California
Los Angeles
San Francisco
Florida
Jacksonville
Tallahassee
Georgia
Atlanta
Hawaii
Illinois
Chicago
Iowa
Davenport
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maryland
Baltimore
Massachusetts
Boston
Michigan
Detroit
Mississippi
Nebraska
Omaha
New York
New York City
North Carolina
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Philadelphia
Puerto Rico
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Austin
Dallas Fort Worth
Houston
San Antonio
Utah
Virginia
Diaspora
Africa
Gambia
Ghana
Liberia
Sierra Leone
America
Canada
Dominican Republic
Haiti
Mexico
Trinidad and Tobago
Israel
Europe
France
Lists
African Americans
Activists
Actors
Astronauts
Billionaires
Jurists
Mathematicians
Republicans
Singers
Spingarn Medal winners
US cabinet members
US representatives
US senators
Visual artists
Writers
African-American firsts
Mayors
Sports firsts
US state firsts
Historic places
Index of related articles
Landmark African-American legislation
Lynching victims
Monuments
Neighborhoods
Topics related to the African diaspora
Category
 United States portal
vteJames Buchanan
15th President of the United States (1857 1861)
17th United States Secretary of State (1845 1849)
Senator from Pennsylvania (1834 1845)
U.S. Representative for PA 4 (1823 1831)
U.S. Representative for PA 3 (1821 1823)
Life
Electoral history of James Buchanan
1844 Democratic National Convention
Oregon Treaty
1848 Democratic National Convention
Wheatland
Doughface
1852 Democratic National Convention
Ostend Manifesto
1856 United States presidential election
1856 Democratic National Convention
Woodward Hill Cemetery
Presidency
Inauguration of James Buchanan
Dred Scott v. Sandford
List of federal judges appointed by James Buchanan
Panic of 1857
Utah War
Bleeding Kansas
Lecompton Constitution
1858 United States elections
Paraguay expedition
United States House Select Committee to Investigate Alleged Corruptions in Government
Corwin Amendment
Public image
James Buchanan Memorial
Buchanan's Birthplace State Park
Buchanan, Michigan
Buchanan, Indiana
Buchanan, Georgia
Buchanan, Missouri
James Buchanan High School
Raising Buchanan
Family
Harriet Lane (niece)
James Buchanan Henry (nephew)
  Franklin Pierce
Abraham Lincoln  
 Category
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dred_Scott_v._Sandford&oldid=1149511770"