Right to communicate one's opinions and ideas
"Free speech" redirects here. For the Eddie Harris album, see Free Speech (album). For other uses, see Freedom of speech (disambiguation) and Freedom of expression (disambiguation).
 Eleanor Roosevelt and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) Article 19 states that "Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers."[1]
 Orator at Speakers' Corner in London, 1974
Part of a series onLiberalism
Schools
Classical
Radical
Conservative
Cultural
Democratic
Feminist
Equity
Green
Internationalist
Muscular
National
Neo
Ordo
Progressive
Religious
Christian
Catholic
Islamic
Jewish
Secular
Social
Techno
Third Way
Concepts
Consent of the governed
Due process
Democracy
Economic liberalism
Economic globalization
Equality
Gender
Legal
Federalism
Freedom
Economic
Market
Trade
Press
Religion
Speech
Harm principle
Internationalism
Invisible hand
Labor theory of property
Lockean proviso
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Negative
Positive
Limited government
Market economy
Natural monopoly
Open society
Permissive society
Popular sovereignty
Property
Private
Public
Rights
Civil and political
Natural and legal
To own property
To bear arms
Rule of law
Secularism
Secular humanism
Separation of church and state
Separation of powers
Social contract
Social justice
Basic income
Social services
Welfare state
State of nature
History
Age of Enlightenment
List of liberal theorists (contributions to liberal theory)
Philosophers
Acton
Arnold
Aron
Badawi
Bastiat
Bentham
Berlin
Burke
 apek
Cassirer
Collingwood
Condorcet
Constant
Croce
Emerson
Friedman
Guizot
Hayek
Hobhouse
Hu
Humboldt
Kant
Keynes
Korais
Kymlicka
List
Locke
Martineau
Mill
Milton
Mises
Montesquieu
Nozick
Ortega
Paine
Popper
Priestley
Rawls
Ricardo
Rousseau
Say
Sen
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Sta l
Tocqueville
Turgot
Voltaire
Weber
Wollstonecraft
Politicians
Artigas
Broglie
Cavour
Cobden
De k
Deakin
Einaudi
Gladstone
Gokhale
Itagaki
Jefferson
Jenkins
Ju rez
Kemal
Kennedy
King
Ko taj
Kossuth
Lamartine
Levski
Lincoln
Lloyd George
Macaulay
Madison
Madero
Mazzini
Milyukov
Mommsen
Naoroji
Ohlin
Pearson
Rathenau
Roosevelt
Sarmiento
St hlberg
Venizelos
Organizations
Africa Liberal Network
Alliance of Liberalsand Democrats for Europe
Alliance of Liberalsand Democrats for Europe Party
Amnesty International
Arab Liberal Federation
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats
European Democratic Party
European Liberal Youth
European Party for Individual Liberty
Humanists International
International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
International Federation of Liberal Youth
Liberal International
Liberal Network for Latin America
Liberal parties
Liberal South East European Network
Regional variants
Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Venizelism
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Liberism
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Poland
Cracovian
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Cobdenism
Gladstonian
Manchester
Whiggism
United States
Arizona School
Classical
Jeffersonian
Modern
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe
Related topics
Anti-authoritarianism
Anti-communism
Bias in American academia
Bias in the media
Capitalism
Democratic
Centrism
Radical centrism
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Empiricism
Humanism
Individualism
Anarchist
Land value tax
Libertarianism
Left
Right
Pirate Party
Sexually liberal feminism
Utilitarianism
 Liberalism portal
 Politics portalvte
Freedom of speech is a principle that supports the freedom of an individual or a community to articulate their opinions and ideas without fear of retaliation, censorship, or legal sanction. The right to freedom of expression has been recognised as a human right in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights law by the United Nations. Many countries have constitutional law that protects free speech. Terms like free speech, freedom of speech, and freedom of expression are used interchangeably in political discourse. However, in a legal sense, the freedom of expression includes any activity of seeking, receiving, and imparting information or ideas, regardless of the medium used.
Article 19 of the UDHR states that "everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference" and "everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice". The version of Article 19 in the ICCPR later amends this by stating that the exercise of these rights carries "special duties and responsibilities" and may "therefore be subject to certain restrictions" when necessary "[f]or respect of the rights or reputation of others" or "[f]or the protection of national security or of public order (ordre public), or of public health or morals".[2]
Freedom of speech and expression, therefore, may not be recognized as being absolute, and common limitations or boundaries to freedom of speech relate to libel, slander, obscenity, pornography, sedition, incitement, fighting words, hate speech, classified information, copyright violation, trade secrets, food labeling, non-disclosure agreements, the right to privacy, dignity, the right to be forgotten, public security, and perjury. Justifications for such include the harm principle, proposed by John Stuart Mill in On Liberty, which suggests that "the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others".[3]
The idea of the "offense principle" is also used to justify speech limitations, describing the restriction on forms of expression deemed offensive to society, considering factors such as extent, duration, motives of the speaker, and ease with which it could be avoided.[3] With the evolution of the digital age, application of freedom of speech becomes more controversial as new means of communication and restrictions arise, for example, the Golden Shield Project, an initiative by Chinese government's Ministry of Public Security that filters potentially unfavourable data from foreign countries.
The Human Rights Measurement Initiative[4] measures the right to opinion and expression for countries around the world, using a survey of in-country human rights experts.[5]
Historical origins[edit]
Freedom of speech and expression has a long history that predates modern international human rights instruments.[6] It is thought that the ancient Athenian democratic principle of free speech may have emerged in the late 6th or early 5th century BC.[7]
Freedom of speech was vindicated by Erasmus and Milton.[6] Edward Coke claimed freedom of speech as "an ancient custom of Parliament" in the 1590s, and it was affirmed in the Protestation of 1621.[8] England's Bill of Rights 1689 legally established the constitutional right of freedom of speech in Parliament which is still in effect, so-called parliamentary privilege.[9][10]
One of the world's first freedom of the press acts was introduced in Sweden in 1766 (Swedish Freedom of the Press Act), mainly due to the classical liberal member of parliament and Ostrobothnian priest Anders Chydenius.[11][12][13][14]  In a report published in 1776, he wrote:[15]No evidence should be needed that a certain freedom of writing and printing is one of the strongest bulwarks of a free organization of the state, as, without it, the estates would not have sufficient information for the drafting of good laws, and those dispensing justice would not be monitored, nor would the subjects know the requirements of the law, the limits of the rights of government, and their responsibilities. Education and ethical conduct would be crushed; coarseness in thought, speech, and manners would prevail, and dimness would darken the entire sky of our freedom in a few years.Under the leadership of the Anders Chydenius, the Caps at the Swedish Riksdag in G vle on December 2, 1766, passed the adoption of a freedom of the press regulation that stopped censorship and introduced the principle of public access to official records in the Swedish authority. Excluded were defamation of the king's majesty and the Swedish Church.
The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, adopted during the French Revolution in 1789, specifically affirmed freedom of speech as an inalienable right.[6] Adopted in 1791, freedom of speech is a feature of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.[16] The French Declaration provides for freedom of expression in Article 11, which states that:
The free communication of ideas and opinions is one of the most precious of the rights of man. Every citizen may, accordingly, speak, write, and print with freedom, but shall be responsible for such abuses of this freedom as shall be defined by law.[17]
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted in 1948, states that:
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.[18]
Today, freedom of speech, or the freedom of expression, is recognised in international and regional human rights law. The right is enshrined in Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, Article 13 of the American Convention on Human Rights and Article 9 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.[19] Based on John Milton's arguments, freedom of speech is understood as a multi-faceted right that includes not only the right to express, or disseminate, information and ideas but three further distinct aspects:
the right to seek information and ideas;
the right to receive information and ideas;
the right to impart information and ideas
International, regional and national standards also recognise that freedom of speech, as the freedom of expression, includes any medium, whether orally, in writing, in print, through the internet or art forms. This means that the protection of freedom of speech as a right includes the content and the means of expression.[19]
Relationship to other rights[edit]
The right to freedom of speech and expression is closely related to other rights. It may be limited when conflicting with other rights (see limitations on freedom of speech).[19] The right to freedom of expression is also related to the right to a fair trial and court proceeding which may limit access to the search for information, or determine the opportunity and means in which freedom of expression is manifested within court proceedings.[20] As a general principle freedom of expression may not limit the right to privacy, as well as the honor and reputation of others. However, greater latitude is given when criticism of public figures is involved.[20]
The right to freedom of expression is particularly important for media, which plays a special role as the bearer of the general right to freedom of expression for all.[19] However, freedom of the press does not necessarily enable freedom of speech. Judith Lichtenberg has outlined conditions in which freedom of the press may constrain freedom of speech. For example, if all the people who control the various mediums of publication suppress information or stifle the diversity of voices inherent in freedom of speech. This limitation was famously summarised as "Freedom of the press is guaranteed only to those who own one".[21] Lichtenberg argues that freedom of the press is simply a form of property right summed up by the principle "no money, no voice".[22]
As a negative right[edit]
Freedom of speech is usually seen as a negative right.[23] This means that the government is legally obliged to take no action against the speaker based on the speaker's views, but that no one is obliged to help any speakers publish their views, and no one is required to listen to, agree with, or acknowledge the speaker or the speaker's views.
Democracy in relation to social interaction[edit]
 Permanent Free Speech Wall in Charlottesville, Virginia, U.S.
Freedom of speech is understood to be fundamental in a democracy. The norms on limiting freedom of expression mean that public debate may not be completely suppressed even in times of emergency.[20] One of the most notable proponents of the link between freedom of speech and democracy is Alexander Meiklejohn. He has argued that the concept of democracy is that of self-government by the people. For such a system to work, an informed electorate is necessary. In order to be appropriately knowledgeable, there must be no constraints on the free flow of information and ideas. According to Meiklejohn, democracy will not be true to its essential ideal if those in power can manipulate the electorate by withholding information and stifling criticism. Meiklejohn acknowledges that the desire to manipulate opinion can stem from the motive of seeking to benefit society. However, he argues, choosing manipulation negates, in its means, the democratic ideal.[24]
Eric Barendt has called this defence of free speech on the grounds of democracy "probably the most attractive and certainly the most fashionable free speech theory in modern Western democracies".[25] Thomas I. Emerson expanded on this defence when he argued that freedom of speech helps to provide a balance between stability and change. Freedom of speech acts as a "safety valve" to let off steam when people might otherwise be bent on revolution. He argues that "The principle of open discussion is a method of achieving a more adaptable and at the same time more stable community, of maintaining the precarious balance between healthy cleavage and necessary consensus". Emerson furthermore maintains that "Opposition serves a vital social function in offsetting or ameliorating (the) normal process of bureaucratic decay".[26]
Research undertaken by the Worldwide Governance Indicators project at the World Bank, indicates that freedom of speech, and the process of accountability that follows it, have a significant impact on the quality of governance of a country. "Voice and Accountability" within a country, defined as "the extent to which a country's citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and free media" is one of the six dimensions of governance that the Worldwide Governance Indicators measure for more than 200 countries.[27] Against this backdrop it is important that development agencies create grounds for effective support for a free press in developing countries.[28]
Richard Moon has developed the argument that the value of freedom of speech and freedom of expression lies with social interactions. Moon writes that "by communicating an individual forms relationships and associations with others   family, friends, co-workers, church congregation, and countrymen. By entering into discussion with others an individual participates in the development of knowledge and in the direction of the community".[29]
Limitations[edit]
For specific country examples, see Freedom of speech by country and criminal speech.
 Members of Westboro Baptist Church (pictured in 2006) have been specifically banned from entering Canada for hate speech.[30]
 Countries with laws against Holocaust denial
Freedom of speech is not regarded as absolute by some, with most legal systems generally setting limits on the freedom of speech, particularly when freedom of speech conflicts with other rights and protections, such as in the cases of libel, slander, pornography, obscenity, fighting words, and intellectual property.
Some limitations to freedom of speech may occur through legal sanction, and others may occur through social disapprobation.[31]
Harmful and offensive content[edit]
Some views are illegal to express because they can cause harm to others. This category often includes speech that is both false and dangerous, such as falsely shouting "Fire!" in a theatre and causing a panic. Justifications for limitations to freedom of speech often reference the "harm principle" or the "offence principle".
In On Liberty (1859), John Stuart Mill argued that "...there ought to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter of ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be considered".[31] Mill argues that the fullest liberty of expression is required to push arguments to their logical limits, rather than the limits of social embarrassment.[32][33][34][35]
In 1985, Joel Feinberg introduced what is known as the "offence principle". Feinberg wrote, "It is always a good reason in support of a proposed criminal prohibition that it would probably be an effective way of preventing serious offence (as opposed to injury or harm) to persons other than the actor, and that it is probably a necessary means to that end".[36] Hence Feinberg argues that the harm principle sets the bar too high and that some forms of expression can be legitimately prohibited by law because they are very offensive. Nevertheless, as offending someone is less serious than harming someone, the penalties imposed should be higher for causing harm.[36] In contrast, Mill does not support legal penalties unless they are based on the harm principle.[31] Because the degree to which people may take offence varies, or may be the result of unjustified prejudice, Feinberg suggests that several factors need to be taken into account when applying the offence principle, including: the extent, duration and social value of the speech, the ease with which it can be avoided, the motives of the speaker, the number of people offended, the intensity of the offence, and the general interest of the community at large.[31]
Jasper Doomen argued that harm should be defined from the point of view of the individual citizen, not limiting harm to physical harm since nonphysical harm may also be involved; Feinberg's distinction between harm and offence is criticized as largely trivial.[37]
In 1999, Bernard Harcourt wrote of the collapse of the harm principle: "Today the debate is characterized by a cacophony of competing harm arguments without any way to resolve them. There is no longer an argument within the structure of the debate to resolve the competing claims of harm. The original harm principle was never equipped to determine the relative importance of harms".[38]
Interpretations of both the harm and offense limitations to freedom of speech are culturally and politically relative. For instance, in Russia, the harm and offense principles have been used to justify the Russian LGBT propaganda law restricting speech (and action) concerning LGBT issues. Many European countries that take pride in freedom of speech nevertheless outlaw speech that might be interpreted as Holocaust denial. These include Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Slovakia, Switzerland and Romania.[39] Armenian genocide denial is also illegal in some countries.
In some countries, blasphemy is a crime. For example, in Austria, defaming Muhammad, the prophet of Islam, is not protected as free speech.[40][41][42] In contrast, in France, blasphemy and disparagement of Muhammad are protected under free speech law.
Certain public institutions may also enact policies restricting the freedom of speech, for example, speech codes at state-operated schools.
In the U.S., the standing landmark opinion on political speech is Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969),[43] expressly overruling Whitney v. California.[44] In Brandenburg, the U.S. Supreme Court referred to the right even to speak openly of violent action and revolution in broad terms:[Our] decisions have fashioned the principle that the constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not allow a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or cause such action.[45] The opinion in Brandenburg discarded the previous test of "clear and present danger" and made the right to freedom of (political) speech protections in the United States almost absolute.[46][47] Hate speech is also protected by the First Amendment in the United States, as decided in R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, (1992) in which the Supreme Court ruled that hate speech is permissible, except in the case of imminent violence.[48] See the First Amendment to the United States Constitution for more detailed information on this decision and its historical background.
Time, place, and manner[edit]
Main article: Time, place and manner
Limitations based on time, place, and manner apply to all speech, regardless of the view expressed.[49] They are generally restrictions that are intended to balance other rights or a legitimate government interest. For example, a time, place, and manner restriction might prohibit a noisy political demonstration at a politician's home during the middle of the night, as that impinges upon the rights of the politician's neighbors to quiet enjoyment of their own homes. An otherwise identical activity might be permitted if it happened at a different time (e.g., during the day), at a different place (e.g., at a government building or in another public forum), or in a different manner (e.g., a silent protest).
The Internet and information society[edit]
 The Free Speech Flag was created during the AACS encryption key controversy as "a symbol to show support for personal freedoms".[50]
Jo Glanville, editor of the Index on Censorship, states that "the Internet has been a revolution for censorship as much as for free speech".[51] International, national and regional standards recognise that freedom of speech, as one form of freedom of expression, applies to any medium, including the Internet.[19] The Communications Decency Act (CDA) of 1996 was the first major attempt by the United States Congress to regulate pornographic material on the Internet. In 1997, in the landmark cyberlaw case of Reno v. ACLU, the US Supreme Court partially overturned the law.[52] Judge Stewart R. Dalzell, one of the three federal judges who in June 1996 declared parts of the CDA unconstitutional, in his opinion stated the following:[53]
The Internet is a far more speech-enhancing medium than print, the village green, or the mails. Because it would necessarily affect the Internet itself, the CDA would necessarily reduce the speech available for adults on the medium. This is a constitutionally intolerable result. Some of the dialogue on the Internet surely tests the limits of conventional discourse. Speech on the Internet can be unfiltered, unpolished, and unconventional, even emotionally charged, sexually explicit, and vulgar   in a word, "indecent" in many communities. But we should expect such speech to occur in a medium in which citizens from all walks of life have a voice. We should also protect the autonomy that such a medium confers to ordinary people as well as media magnates.[...] My analysis does not deprive the Government of all means of protecting children from the dangers of Internet communication. The Government can continue to protect children from pornography on the Internet through vigorous enforcement of existing laws criminalising obscenity and child pornography. [...] As we learned at the hearing, there is also a compelling need for public educations about the benefits and dangers of this new medium, and the Government can fill that role as well. In my view, our action today should only mean that Government's permissible supervision of Internet contents stops at the traditional line of unprotected speech. [...] The absence of governmental regulation of Internet content has unquestionably produced a kind of chaos, but as one of the plaintiff's experts put it with such resonance at the hearing: "What achieved success was the very chaos that the Internet is. The strength of the Internet is chaos." Just as the strength of the Internet is chaos, so that strength of our liberty depends upon the chaos and cacophony of the unfettered speech the First Amendment protects.[53]
The World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) Declaration of Principles adopted in 2003 makes specific reference to the importance of the right to freedom of expression for the "Information Society" in stating:
We reaffirm, as an essential foundation of the Information society, and as outlined in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, that everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; that this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers. Communication is a fundamental social process, a basic human need and the foundation of all social organisation. It is central to the Information Society. Everyone, everywhere should have the opportunity to participate and no one should be excluded from the benefits of the Information Society offers.[54]
According to Bernt Hugenholtz and Lucie Guibault, the public domain is under pressure from the "commodification of information" as information with previously little or no economic value has acquired independent economic value in the information age. This includes factual data, personal data, genetic information and pure ideas. The commodification of information is taking place through intellectual property law, contract law, as well as broadcasting and telecommunications law.[55]
Freedom of information[edit]
Main article: Freedom of information
Freedom of information is an extension of freedom of speech where the medium of expression is the Internet. Freedom of information may also refer to the right to privacy in the context of the Internet and information technology. As with the right to freedom of expression, the right to privacy is a recognised human right and freedom of information acts as an extension to this right.[56] Freedom of information may also concern censorship in an information technology context, i.e. the ability to access Web content, without censorship or restrictions.[57]
Freedom of information is also explicitly protected by acts such as the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act of Ontario, in Canada. The Access to Information Act gives Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and any person or corporation present in Canada a right to access records of government institutions that are subject to the Act.
[58]
Internet censorship[edit]
Main articles: Internet censorship and Internet censorship by country
The concept of freedom of information has emerged in response to state sponsored censorship, monitoring and surveillance of the internet. Internet censorship includes the control or suppression of the publishing or accessing of information on the Internet.[59] The Global Internet Freedom Consortium claims to remove blocks to the "free flow of information" for what they term "closed societies".[60] According to the Reporters without Borders (RWB) "internet enemy list" the following states engage in pervasive internet censorship: Mainland China, Cuba, Iran, Myanmar/Burma, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Vietnam.[61]
A widely publicized example of internet censorship is the "Great Firewall of China" (in reference both to its role as a network firewall and the ancient Great Wall of China). The system blocks content by preventing IP addresses from being routed through and consists of standard firewall and proxy servers at the internet gateways. The system also selectively engages in DNS poisoning when particular sites are requested. The government does not appear to be systematically examining Internet content, as this appears to be technically impractical.[62] Internet censorship in the People's Republic of China is conducted under a wide variety of laws and administrative regulations, including more than sixty regulations directed at the Internet. Censorship systems are vigorously implemented by provincial branches of state-owned ISPs, business companies, and organizations.[63][64]
Saudi Arabia's government had been intensifying the scrutiny of social media accounts, under which they were detaining several activists, critics and even normal social media users over few critical tweets. A law professor, Awad Al-Qarni became a victim of Saudi's internet censorship and was facing death sentence. Saudi-controlled media portrayed him as a dangerous preacher due to his Twitter and WhatsApp posts. But, dissidents considered him as an important intellectual who maintained strong social media influence.[65]
Relationship with disinformation[edit]
Further information: Disinformation
Some legal scholars (such as Tim Wu of Columbia University) have argued that the traditional issues of free speech that "the main threat to free speech" is the censorship of "suppressive states," and that "ill-informed or malevolent speech" can and should be overcome by "more and better speech" rather than censorship assumes scarcity of information. This scarcity prevailed during the 20th century, but with the arrival of the internet, information became plentiful, "but the attention of listeners" scarce. Furthermore, in the words of Wu, this "cheap speech" made possible by the internet " ... may be used to attack, harass, and silence as much as it is used to illuminate or debate".[66][67] The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) has argued that "censorship cannot be the only answer to disinformation online" and that tech companies "have a history of overcorrecting and censoring accurate, useful speech or, even worse, reinforcing misinformation with their policies."[68]
According to Wu, in the 21st century, the danger is not "suppressive states" that target "speakers directly", but that
targets listeners or it undermines speakers indirectly. More precisely, emerging techniques of speech control depend on (1) a range of new punishments, like unleashing "troll armies" to abuse the press and other critics, and (2) "flooding" tactics (sometimes called "reverse censorship") that distort or drown out disfavored speech through the creation and dissemination of fake news, the payment of fake commentators, and the deployment of propaganda robots.[69] As journalist Peter Pomerantsev writes, these techniques employ "information ... in weaponized terms, as a tool to confuse, blackmail, demoralize, subvert and paralyze."[70][66]
History of dissent and truth[edit]
Further information: Dissent
The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Western culture and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Title page of Index Librorum Prohibitorum, or List of Prohibited Books (Venice, 1564)
Before the invention of the printing press, a written work, once created, could only be physically multiplied by highly laborious and error-prone manual copying. No elaborate system of censorship and control over scribes existed, who until the 14th century were restricted to religious institutions, and their works rarely caused wider controversy. In response to the printing press, and the theological heresies it allowed to spread, the Roman Catholic Church moved to impose censorship.[71] Printing allowed for multiple exact copies of a work, leading to a more rapid and widespread circulation of ideas and information (see print culture).[72] The origins of copyright law in most European countries lie in efforts by the Roman Catholic Church and governments to regulate and control the output of printers.[72]
 In Panegyricae orationes septem (1596), Henric van Cuyck, a Dutch Bishop, defended the need for censorship and argued that Johannes Gutenberg's printing press had resulted in a world infected by "pernicious lies" so van Cuyck singled out the Talmud and the Qur'an, and the writings of Martin Luther, Jean Calvin and Erasmus of Rotterdam.[73]
In 1501, Pope Alexander VI issued a Bill against the unlicensed printing of books. In 1559, Pope Paul IV promulgated the Index Expurgatorius, or List of Prohibited Books.[71] The Index Expurgatorius is the most famous and long-lasting example of "bad books" catalogues issued by the Roman Catholic Church, which presumed to be in authority over private thoughts and opinions, and suppressed views that went against its doctrines. The Index Expurgatorius was administered by the Roman Inquisition, but enforced by local government authorities, and went through 300 editions. Amongst others, it banned or censored books written by Ren  Descartes, Giordano Bruno, Galileo Galilei, David Hume, John Locke, Daniel Defoe, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Voltaire.[74] While governments and church encouraged printing in many ways because it allowed for the dissemination of Bibles and government information, works of dissent and criticism could also circulate rapidly. Consequently, governments established controls over printers across Europe, requiring them to have official licenses to trade and produce books.[72]
 First page of John Milton's 1644 edition of Areopagitica, in which he argued forcefully against the Licensing Order of 1643
The notion that the expression of dissent or subversive views should be tolerated, not censured or punished by law, developed alongside the rise of printing and the press. Areopagitica, published in 1644, was John Milton's response to the Parliament of England's re-introduction of government licensing of printers, hence publishers.[75] Church authorities had previously ensured that Milton's essay on the right to divorce was refused a license for publication. In Areopagitica, published without a license,[76] Milton made an impassioned plea for freedom of expression and toleration of falsehood,[75] stating:
Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely according to conscience, above all liberties.[75]
 This 1688 edition of Jacobus de Voragine's Golden Legend (1260) was censored according to the Index Librorum Expurgatorum of 1707, which listed the specific passages of books already in circulation that required censorship.[77][78]
Milton's defense of freedom of expression was grounded in a Protestant worldview. He thought that the English people had the mission to work out the truth of the Reformation, which would lead to the enlightenment of all people. Nevertheless, Milton also articulated the main strands of future discussions about freedom of expression. By defining the scope of freedom of expression and "harmful" speech, Milton argued against the principle of pre-censorship and in favor of tolerance for a wide range of views.[75] Freedom of the press ceased being regulated in England in 1695 when the Licensing Order of 1643 was allowed to expire after the introduction of the Bill of Rights 1689 shortly after the Glorious Revolution.[79][80] The emergence of publications like the Tatler (1709) and the Spectator (1711) are credited for creating a 'bourgeois public sphere' in England that allowed for a free exchange of ideas and information.
More governments attempted to centralize control as the "menace" of printing spread.[81] The French crown repressed printing and the printer Etienne Dolet was burned at the stake in 1546. In 1557 the British Crown thought to stem the flow of seditious and heretical books by chartering the Stationers' Company. The right to print was limited to the members of that guild. Thirty years later, the Star Chamber was chartered to curtail the "greate enormities and abuses" of "dyvers contentyous and disorderlye persons professinge the arte or mystere of pryntinge or selling of books". The right to print was restricted to two universities and the 21 existing printers in the city of London, which had 53 printing presses. As the British crown took control of type founding in 1637, printers fled to the Netherlands. Confrontation with authority made printers radical and rebellious, with 800 authors, printers, and book dealers being incarcerated in the Bastille in Paris before it was stormed in 1789.[81]
A succession of English thinkers was at the forefront of early discussion on a right to freedom of expression, among them John Milton (1608 74) and John Locke (1632 1704). Locke established the individual as the unit of value and the bearer of rights to life, liberty, property and the pursuit of happiness. However, Locke's ideas evolved primarily around the concept of the right to seek salvation for one's soul. He was thus primarily concerned with theological matters. Locke neither supported a universal toleration of peoples nor freedom of speech; according to his ideas, some groups, such as atheists, should not be allowed.[82]
 George Orwell statue at the headquarters of the BBC. A defence of free speech in an open society, the wall behind the statue is inscribed with the words "If liberty means anything at all, it means the right to tell people what they do not want to hear", words from George Orwell's proposed preface to Animal Farm (1945).[83]
By the second half of the 17th century philosophers on the European continent like Baruch Spinoza and Pierre Bayle developed ideas encompassing a more universal aspect freedom of speech and toleration than the early English philosophers.[82] By the 18th century the idea of freedom of speech was being discussed by thinkers all over the Western world, especially by French philosophes like Denis Diderot, Baron d'Holbach and Claude Adrien Helv tius.[84] The idea began to be incorporated in political theory both in theory as well as practice; the first state edict in history proclaiming complete freedom of speech was the one issued 4 December 1770 in Denmark-Norway during the regency of Johann Friedrich Struensee.[85] However Struensee himself imposed some minor limitations to this edict on 7 October 1771, and it was even further limited after the fall of Struensee with legislation introduced in 1773, although censorship was not reintroduced.[86]
John Stuart Mill (1806 1873) argued that without human freedom, there could be no progress in science, law, or politics, which according to Mill, required free discussion of opinion. Mill's On Liberty, published in 1859, became a classic defence of the right to freedom of expression.[75] Mill argued that truth drives out falsity, therefore the free expression of ideas, true or false, should not be feared. Truth is not stable or fixed but evolves with time. Mill argued that much of what we once considered true has turned out false. Therefore, views should not be prohibited for their apparent falsity. Mill also argued that free discussion is necessary to prevent the "deep slumber of a decided opinion". Discussion would drive the march of truth, and by considering false views, the basis of true views could be re-affirmed.[87] Furthermore, Mill argued that an opinion only carries intrinsic value to the owner of that opinion, thus silencing the expression of that opinion is an injustice to a basic human right. It is generally held that for Mill, the only instance in which speech can be justifiably suppressed is to prevent harm from a clear and direct threat.[88] Neither economic or moral implications nor the speaker's own well-being would justify suppression of speech.[89] However Mill in On Liberty suggests the speech of pimps   instigating clients and sex workers to have sex   should be restricted. This suggests he may be willing to restrict some speech that, while not harming others, undermines their decisional autonomy.[90]
In her 1906 biography of Voltaire, Evelyn Beatrice Hall coined the following sentence to illustrate Voltaire's beliefs: "I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it".[91] Hall's quote is frequently cited to describe the principle of freedom of speech.[91] Noam Chomsky stated, "If you believe in freedom of speech, you believe in freedom of speech for views you don't like. Dictators such as Stalin and Hitler, were in favor of freedom of speech for views they liked only. If you're in favor of freedom of speech, that means you're in favor of freedom of speech precisely for views you despise".[92] Lee Bollinger argues that "the free speech principle involves a special act of carving out one area of social interaction for extraordinary self-restraint, the purpose of which is to develop and demonstrate a social capacity to control feelings evoked by a host of social encounters". Bollinger argues that tolerance is a desirable value, if not essential. However, critics argue that society should be concerned by those who directly deny or advocate, for example, genocide (see limitations above).[93]
As chairman of the London-based PEN International, a club which defends freedom of expression and a free press, English author H. G. Wells met with Stalin in 1934 and was hopeful of reform in the Soviet Union. However, during their meeting in Moscow, Wells said, "the free expression of opinion even of opposition opinion, I do not know if you are prepared yet for that much freedom here".[94]
 An "unexpurgated" edition of Lady Chatterley's Lover (1959)
The 1928 novel Lady Chatterley's Lover by D. H. Lawrence was banned for obscenity in several countries, including the United Kingdom, the United States, Australia, Canada, and India. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, it was the subject of landmark court rulings that saw the ban for obscenity overturned. Dominic Sandbrook of The Telegraph in the UK wrote, "Now that public obscenity has become commonplace, it is hard to recapture the atmosphere of a society that saw fit to ban books such as Lady Chatterley's Lover because it was likely to 'deprave and corrupt' its readers".[95] Fred Kaplan of The New York Times stated the overturning of the obscenity laws "set off an explosion of free speech" in the U.S.[96] The 1960s also saw the Free Speech Movement, a massive long-lasting student protest on the campus of the University of California, Berkeley during the 1964 65 academic year.[97]
In contrast to Anglophone nations, France was a haven for literary freedom.[98] The innate French regard for the mind meant that France was disinclined to punish literary figures for their writing, and prosecutions were rare.[98] While it was prohibited everywhere else, James Joyce's Ulysses was published in Paris in 1922. Henry Miller's 1934 novel Tropic of Cancer (banned in the U.S. until 1963) and Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover were published in France decades before they were available in the respective authors' home countries.[98]
In 1964 comedian Lenny Bruce was arrested in the U.S. due to complaints again about his use of various obscenities. A three-judge panel presided over his widely publicized six-month trial. He was found guilty of obscenity in November 1964. He was sentenced on 21 December 1964, to four months in a workhouse.[99] He was set free on bail during the appeals process and died before the appeal was decided. On 23 December 2003, thirty-seven years after Bruce's death, New York Governor George Pataki granted him a posthumous pardon for his obscenity conviction.[100]
In the United States, the right to freedom of expression has been interpreted to include the right to take and publish photographs of strangers in public areas without their permission or knowledge.[101][102] This is not the case worldwide.
Offences[edit]
Further information: L se-majest 
 A map of nations which have L se-majest  laws as of September 2022
In some countries, people are not allowed to talk about certain things such as L se-majest  which is an offence against the dignity of a reigning sovereign or against a state. Doing so constitutes an offence. For example, Saudi Arabia is responsible for executing journalist Jamal Khashoggi in 2018. As he entered the Saudi embassy in Turkey, a team of Saudi assassins killed him.[103] Another Saudi writer, Raif Badawi, was arrested in 2012 and lashed.[104]
See also[edit]
Academic freedom
Artistic freedom
The Confessionals
Cancel culture
Civil and political rights
Digital rights
Election silence
Everybody Draw Mohammed Day
Forced or compelled speech
Free speech fights
Freedom of thought
Glasnost
Global Network Initiative
Hate speech
Heckler's veto
IFEX (organization)
Illegal number
Investigative journalism
Je suis Charlie
Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy
Jamal Khashoggi
Legality of Holocaust denial
Post World War II legality of Nazi flags
Strafgesetzbuch section 86a
Verbotsgesetz 1947
Bans on communist symbols
Lolicon/Shotacon
Legal status of drawn pornography depicting minors
Simulated child pornography
Market for loyalties theory
Media transparency
No Platform
Open court principle
Paradox of tolerance
Parrhesia
Photography Is Not a Crime
Pirate Party
Political correctness
Rights
Safety of journalists
Stanley v. Georgia
Symbolic speech
Victimless crime
References[edit]
^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". www.un.org. 6 October 2015. Archived from the original on 2 October 2019. Retrieved 2 October 2020.
^ "Article 19". International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession by UN General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI) of 16 December 1966, entry into force 23 March 1976. 23 March 1976. Archived from the original on 5 July 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2014.
^ a b van Mill, David (1 January 2016).  Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2016 ed.). Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2016.
^ "Human Rights Measurement Initiative   The first global initiative to track the human rights performance of countries". humanrightsmeasurement.org. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
^ "Right to opinion and expression - HRMI Rights Tracker". rightstracker.org. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
^ a b c Smith, David (5 February 2006). "Timeline: a history of free speech". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 29 August 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2010.
^ Raaflaub, Kurt; Ober, Josiah; Wallace, Robert (2007). Origins of democracy in ancient Greece. University of California Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-520-24562-4.
^ Ofir Haivry and Yoram Hazony: What Is Conservatism? Archived 7 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine American Affairs Summer 2017 / Volume I, Number 2.
^ "Bill of Rights 1689". Parliament UK. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2019.
^ Williams, E. N. (1960). The Eighteenth-Century Constitution. 1688 1815. Cambridge University Press. pp. 26 29. OCLC 1146699.
^ ""The Freedom of the Press Act", Sveriges Riksdag". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.
^ Fortress Europe?   Circular Letter. "FECL 15 (May 1993): The Swedish Tradition of Freedom of Press". Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 14 March 2016.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
^ "The World's First Freedom of Information Act (Sweden/Finland 1766)". Scribd. Archived from the original on 15 December 2013. Retrieved 14 March 2016.
^ "Sweden". Archived from the original on 6 April 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2020.
^ Luoma, Jukka. "Helsingin Sanomat   International Edition". Archived from the original on 20 November 2007. Retrieved 26 November 2007.
^ "Freedom of Speech". HISTORY. Archived from the original on 9 March 2020. Retrieved 23 February 2020.
^ Arthur W. Diamond Law Library at Columbia Law School (26 March 2008). "Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen". Hrcr.org. www.hrcr.org. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013.
^ United Nations (10 September 1948). "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights". UN.org. www.un.org. Archived from the original on 3 July 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2013.
^ a b c d e Andrew Puddephatt, Freedom of Expression, The essentials of Human Rights, Hodder Arnold, 2005, p. 128
^ a b c Brett, Sebastian (1999). Limits to tolerance: freedom of expression and the public debate in Chile. Human Rights Watch. p. xxv. ISBN 978-1-56432-192-3. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ New Yorker, 14 May 1960, p. 109
^ Sanders, Karen (2003). Ethics & Journalism. Sage. p. 68. ISBN 978-0-7619-6967-9. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2018.
^ Nossel, Suzanne (28 July 2020). Dare to Speak: Defending Free Speech for All. HarperCollins. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-06-296606-3. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2021.
^ Marlin, Randal (2002). Propaganda and the Ethics of Persuasion. Broadview Press. pp. 226 27. ISBN 978-1551113760. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ Marlin, Randal (2002). Propaganda and the Ethics of Persuasion. Broadview Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-1551113760. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ Marlin, Randal (2002). Propaganda and the Ethics of Persuasion. Broadview Press. pp. 228 29. ISBN 978-1551113760. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ "A Decade of Measuring the Quality of Governance" (PDF). World Bank. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2008.
^ Matschke, Alexander (25 December 2014). "Freedom of expression promotes democracy". D+C Development and Cooperation. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015.
^ Marlin, Randal (2002). Propaganda and the Ethics of Persuasion. Broadview Press. p. 229. ISBN 978-1551113760. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ Church members enter Canada, aiming to picket bus victim's funeral Archived 15 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine, CBC News, 8 August 2008.
^ a b c d "Freedom of Speech". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 17 April 2008. Archived from the original on 23 March 2019. Retrieved 29 May 2011.
^ Mill, John Stuart (1859). "Introductory". On Liberty (4th ed.). London: Longman, Roberts & Green (published 1869). para. 5. Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2016. Society can and does execute its own mandates ... it practises a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul itself. Protection, therefore, against the tyranny of the magistrate is not enough...
^ Mill, John Stuart (1859). "Of the Liberty of Thought and Discussion". On Liberty (4th ed.). London: Longman, Roberts & Green (published 1869). para. 19. Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2016. In respect to all persons but those whose pecuniary circumstances make them independent of the good will of other people, opinion, on this subject, is as efficacious as law; men might as well be imprisoned, as excluded from the means of earning their bread.
^ Ten Cate, Irene M. (2010). "Speech, Truth, and Freedom: An Examination of John Stuart Mill's and Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes's Free Speech Defenses". Yale Journal of Law & the Humanities. 22 (1). Article 2. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2016. [A] central argument for freedom of speech in On Liberty is that in order to maximize the benefits a society can gain ... it must permanently commit to restraining dominant groups from their natural inclination to demand conformity.
^ Wragg, Paul (2015). "Free Speech Rights at Work: Resolving the Differences between Practice and Liberal Principle". Industrial Law Journal. Oxford University Press. 44 (1): 11. doi:10.1093/indlaw/dwu031. Comparison may be made between Mill's 'tyrannical majority' and the employer who dismisses an employee for expression that it dislikes on moral grounds. The protection of employer action in these circumstances evokes Mill's concern about state tolerance of coercive means to ensure conformity with orthodox moral viewpoints and so nullify unorthodox ones.
^ a b Harcourt. "Conclusion". The Collapse of the Harm Principle. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2015.
^ Doomen 2014, pp. 111, 112.
^ Kenneth Einar Himma. "Philosophy of Law". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2014.
^ "Italian Parliament introduces holocaust denial legislation". UPI. Archived from the original on 15 March 2020. Retrieved 28 June 2019.
^ Chase Winter (26 October 2018). "Calling Prophet Muhammad a pedophile does not fall within freedom of speech: European court". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 27 October 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018. An Austrian woman's conviction for calling the Prophet Muhammad a pedophile did not violate her freedom of speech, the European Court of Human Rights ruled Thursday.
^ Lucia I. Suarez Sang (26 October 2018). "Defaming Muhammad does not fall under purview of free speech, European court rules". Fox News. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018. The freedom of speech does not extend to include defaming the prophet of Islam, the European Court of Human rights ruled Thursday.
^ Bojan Pancevski (26 October 2018). "Europe Court Upholds Ruling Against Woman Who Insulted Islam". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018. Europe's highest human rights court ruled on Friday that disparagement of religious doctrines such as insulting the Prophet Muhammad isn't protected by freedom of expression and can be prosecuted.
^ Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969)
^ Jasper, Margaret C. (1999). The Law of Speech and the First Amendment. Oceana Publications. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-379-11335-8. Retrieved 4 April 2013.
^ Brandenburg, at 447
^ Brandenburg, at 450 01
^ Lewis 2007, p. 124.
^ "ABA Division for Public Education: Students: Debating the "Mighty Constitutional Opposites": Hate Speech Debate". www.americanbar.org. Archived from the original on 13 October 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2016.
^ Emanuel, Steven L. (25 March 2020). Emanuel Crunchtime for Constitutional Law. Wolters Kluwer Law & Business. pp. 153 154. ISBN 978-1-5438-0727-1. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2021.
^ Marcotte, John (1 May 2007). "free speech flag". Badmouth. Archived from the original on 4 May 2007. Retrieved 27 October 2017.
^ Glanville, Jo (17 November 2008). "The big business of net censorship". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2014.
^ Godwin, Mike (2003). Cyber Rights: Defending Free Speech in the Digital Age. MIT Press. pp. 349 52. ISBN 0-262-57168-4.
^ a b Rowland, Diane (2005). Information Technology Law. Routledge-Cavendish. pp. 463 65. ISBN 978-1859417560.
^ Klang, Mathias; Murray, Andrew (2005). Human Rights in the Digital Age. Routledge. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-904385-31-8. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ Guibault, Lucy; Hugenholtz, Bernt (2006). The future of the public domain: identifying the commons in information law. Kluwer Law International. p. 1. ISBN 9789041124357. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2018.
^ Clarke, Ian; Miller, Scott G.; Hong, Theodore W.; Sandberg, Oskar; Wiley, Brandon (2002). "Protecting Free Expression Online with Freenet" (PDF). Internet Computing. IEEE. pp. 40 49. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 15 October 2008.
^ Pauli, Darren (14 January 2008). "Industry rejects Australian gov't sanitized Internet measure". The Industry Standard. Archived from the original on 12 September 2012.
^ Martin, Robert; Adam, G. Stuart (1994). A Sourcebook of Canadian Media Law. McGill-Queen's Press. pp. 232 34. ISBN 0886292387.
^ Deibert, Robert; Palfrey, John G; Rohozinski, Rafal; Zittrain, Jonathan (2008). Access denied: the practice and policy of global Internet filtering. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0262541961.
^ "Our Mission". Global Internet Freedom Consortium. Archived from the original on 27 September 2017.
^ "Internet Enemies" (PDF). Paris: Reporters Without Borders. March 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 March 2011.
^ Watts, Jonathan (20 February 2006). "War of the words". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2016.
^ "II. How Censorship Works in China: A Brief Overview". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 22 April 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2006.
^ "Chinese Laws and Regulations Regarding Internet". Archived from the original on 20 February 2012.
^ Nereim, Vivian (21 February 2023). "'Equality of Injustice for All': Saudi Arabia Expands Crackdown on Dissent". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 February 2023.
^ a b Wu, Tim (1 September 2017). "Is the First Amendment Obsolete?". Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University. Archived from the original on 21 September 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
^ Yaffa, Joshua (7 September 2020). "Is Russian Meddling as Dangerous as We Think?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2020.
^ Gebhart, Jillian C. York, David Greene, and Gennie (1 May 2019). "Censorship Can't Be The Only Answer to Disinformation Online". Electronic Frontier Foundation. Retrieved 3 May 2022.
^ "What things regulate speech" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 12 January 2021.
^ "The Menace of Unreality: How the Kremlin Weaponizes Information, Culture and Money". Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 12 January 2021.
^ a b de Sola Pool, Ithiel (1983). Technologies of freedom. Harvard University Press. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-674-87233-2.
^ a b c MacQueen, Hector L; Waelde, Charlotte; Laurie, Graeme T (2007). Contemporary Intellectual Property: Law and Policy. Oxford University Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-19-926339-4. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2016.
^ "6. Henric van Cuyck, Bishop of Roermond (1546 1609). Panegyricae orationes septem. Louvain: Philippus Zangrius, 1596". Ecclesiastical Censorship, "Heresy and Error": The Ecclesiastical Censorship of Books, 1400 1800. Bridwell Library. 17 December 2000. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
^ Castillo, Anastasia (2010). Banned Books: Censorship in Eighteenth-Century England. GRIN Verlag. p. 12. ISBN 978-3-640-71688-3. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ a b c d e Sanders, Karen (2003). Ethics & Journalism. Sage. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-7619-6967-9. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2018.
^ "13. John Milton (1608 1674). Areopagitica; A Speech of Mr. John Milton for the Liberty of Unlicenc'd Printing, to the Parlament of England. London: [s.n.], 1644". Early Censorship in England, "Heresy and Error": The Ecclesiastical Censorship of Books, 1400 1800. Bridwell Library. 17 December 2000. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
^ "The index of expurgations". "Heresy and Error": The Ecclesiastical Censorship of Books, 1400 1800. Bridwell Library. 17 December 2000. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
^ "52. Jacobus de Voragine (c. 1230 1298). Legenda aurea sanctorum. Madrid: Juan Garcia, 1688". The Index of Expurgations, "Heresy and Error": The Ecclesiastical Censorship of Books, 1400 1800. Bridwell Library. 17 December 2000. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
^ Rayner, Gordon (7 October 2011). "Leveson Inquiry: British press freedom is a model for the world, editor tells inquiry". The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group Limited. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011. Retrieved 9 May 2018. Mr Rusbridger said: "When people talk about licensing journalists or newspapers the instinct should be to refer them to history. Read about how licensing of the press in Britain was abolished in 1695.
^ Nelson, Fraser (24 November 2012). "David Blunkert warns MPs against regulating the Press". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2018. Jeremy Paxman famously said he went into journalism after hearing that the relationship between a journalist and a politician was akin to that of a dog and a lamppost. Several MPs now want to replace this with a principle whereby MPs define the parameters under which the press operates   and "work together". It is a hideous idea that must be resisted. The last time this happened was under the Licensing Order of 1643, which was allowed to expire in 1695 after the introduction of the 1688 Bill of Rights shortly after the Glorious Revolution. As I wrote in my Daily Telegraph column yesterday, it's amazing that so many Tory MPs should want to turn the clock back 300 years.
^ a b de Sola Pool, Ithiel (1983). Technologies of freedom. Harvard University Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-674-87233-2.
^ a b Jonathan Israel (2002). Radical Enlightenment. Oxford University Press. pp. 265 67.
^ Jennings, Martin (7 November 2017). "Orwell statue unveiled". BBC. Archived from the original on 14 December 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2017.
^ Jonathan Israel (2006). Enlightenment Contested. Oxford University Press. pp. 155ff, 781ff.
^ Jonathan Israel (2010). A Revolution of the Mind. Princeton University Press. p. 76. ISBN 9780691142005.
^ H. Arnold Barton (1986). Scandinavia in the Revolutionary Era   1760 1815. University of Minnesota Press. pp. 90 91. ISBN 9780816613922.
^ Sanders, Karen (2003). Ethics & Journalism. Sage. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-7619-6967-9. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2018.
^ Cohen-Almagor, Raphael (6 June 2017). "J.S. Mill's Boundaries of Freedom of Expression: A Critique". Philosophy. 92 (4): 565 596. doi:10.1017/s0031819117000213. ISSN 0031-8191. S2CID 149097425.
^ Warburton, Nigel (2009). Free Speech: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford. pp. 24 29. ISBN 978-0-19-923235-2. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 6 May 2020.
^ Tunick, Mark (22 August 2022). "John Stuart Mill's Passage on Pimps and the Limits on Free Speech". Utilitas. 34 (4): 392 408. doi:10.1017/S0953820822000280. ISSN 0953-8208. S2CID 251760265.
^ a b Boller, Paul F. Jr.; George, John (1989). They Never Said It: A Book of Fake Quotes, Misquotes, and Misleading Attributions. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 124 26. ISBN 0-19-505541-1.
^ Mark Achbar and Peter Wintonick (1992). Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media.
^ Bollinger, Lee C. (1986). The Tolerant Society: Freedom of Speech and Extremist Speech in America. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195040007.
^ Freedom of Speech in Russia: Politics and Media from Gorbachev to Putin. Taylor & Francis, 25. 2016. p. 142.
^ Sandbrook, Dominic (16 October 2010). "Lady Chatterley trial - 50 years on. The filthy book that set us free and fettered us forever". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2018. Though few then could have realised it, a tiny but unmistakeable line runs from the novel Lawrence wrote in the late 1920s to an international pornography industry today worth more than  26 billion a year. Now that public obscenity has become commonplace, it is hard to recapture the atmosphere of a society that saw fit to ban books such as Lady Chatterley's Lover because it was likely to "deprave and corrupt" its readers. Although only half a century separates us from Harold Macmillan's Britain, the world of 1960 can easily seem like ancient history. In a Britain when men still wore heavy grey suits, working women were still relatively rare and the Empire was still, just, a going concern, D H Lawrence's book was merely one of many banned because of its threat to public morality.
^ Kaplan, Fred (20 July 2009). "The Day Obscenity Became Art". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 9 May 2018. TODAY is the 50th anniversary of the court ruling that overturned America's obscenity laws, setting off an explosion of free speech   and also, in retrospect, splashing cold water on the idea, much discussed during Sonia Sotomayor's Supreme Court confirmation hearings, that judges are "umpires" rather than agents of social change.
^ * "Berkeley FSM | Free Speech Movement 50th Anniversary". fsm.berkeley.edu. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2019.
^ a b c "Dirty books and literary freedom: The Lady Chatterley publisher who beat the censors". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2021.
^ "Lenny Bruce Gets 4 Months In Jail". The New York Times. 22 December 1964. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2020.
^ Minnis, Glenn "Lenny Bruce Pardoned" Archived 20 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine, CBS News/Associated Press, 23 December 2003. Retrieved 8 September 2019
^ Kenworthy, Bill (April 2012). "Photography & First Amendment". Newseum Institute. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
^ "Photographers' Rights". aclu.org. American Civil Liberties Union. Archived from the original on 9 May 2018. Retrieved 9 May 2018. Taking photographs and video of things that are plainly visible in public spaces is a constitutional right and that includes transportation facilities, the outside of federal buildings, and police and other government officials carrying out their duties. Unfortunately, law enforcement officers have been known to ask people to stop taking photographs of public places. Those who fail to comply have sometimes been harassed, detained, and arrested. Other people have ended up in FBI databases for taking innocuous photographs of public places.
^ "Opinion | Jamal Khashoggi: What the Arab world needs most is free expression". The Washington Post. 17 October 2018. Archived from the original on 20 October 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2022.
^ "The first 50 lashes: A Saudi activist's wife endures her husband's brutal sentence". TheGuardian.com. 17 May 2016. Archived from the original on 30 December 2021. Retrieved 30 December 2021.
Further reading[edit]
Curtis, Michael Kent (2000). Free Speech, "The People's Darling Privilege": Struggles for Freedom of Expression in American History. Duke University Press. ISBN 0822325292.
Doomen, Jasper (2014). Freedom and Equality in a Liberal Democratic State. Bruylant. ISBN 9782802746232.
Godwin, Mike (2003). Cyber Rights: Defending Free Speech in the Digital Age. MIT Press. ISBN 0262571684.
Grossman, Wendy M. (1997). Net.wars. New York University Press. ISBN 0814731031.
Kors, Alan Charles (2008). "Freedom of Speech".  In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 182 85. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n112. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Lewis, Anthony (2007). Freedom for the Thought That We Hate: A Biography of the First Amendment. Basic Books. ISBN 9780465039173. OCLC 494134545.
McLeod, Kembrew (2007). Freedom of Expression: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual Property. Lawrence Lessig (foreword). University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0816650316.
Nelson, Samuel P. (2005). Beyond the First Amendment: The Politics of Free Speech and Pluralism. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0801881730.
Semeraro, Pietro (2009). L'esercizio di un diritto. Giuffre Milano.
Shaw, Caroline. "Freedom of expression and the palladium of British liberties, 1650 2000: A review essay". History Compass (Oct 2020). Online.
External links[edit]
Freedom of speech  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Article19.org, global campaign for free expression
Free Speech Debate, a research project of the Dahrendorf Programme for the Study of Freedom at St Antony's College in the University of Oxford
Index on Censorship, an international organisation that promotes and defends the right to freedom of expression
Media Freedom Navigator: Media Freedom Indices at a Glance, Deutsche Welle Akademie
Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression, Organization of American States
vteLibertyConcepts
Cognitive liberty
Moral responsibility
Personification of Liberty
Libertas
Negative liberty
Positive liberty
Rights
Self-ownership
Social liberty
Free will
By type
Academic
Civil
Economic
Intellectual
Internet
Morphological
Political
By right
Assembly
Association
Asylum
Choice
Death
Education
Fair trial
Family life
Freedom from discrimination
Food
Gun
Health
Housing
Information
Life
Morphological
Movement
Press
Privacy
Property
Protest
Religion
Repair
Resist
Self-defense
Sexuality
Silence
Speech
Thought
To be forgotten
Truth
Water and sanitation
See also
  Nous la Libert 
Anarchism
Autonomy
Civil libertarianism
Drug liberalization
Left-libertarianism
Libertarianism
Right-libertarianism
vteSubstantive human rightsPlease note: What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rightsCivil and political
Equality before the law
Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of association
Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment
Freedom from discrimination
Freedom of information
Freedom of movement
Freedom of religion
Freedom from slavery
Freedom of speech
Freedom of thought
Freedom from torture
Legal aid
LGBT rights
Liberty
Nationality
Personhood
Presumption of innocence
Right of asylum
Right to die
Right to a fair trial
Right to family life
Right to keep and bear arms
Right to life
Right to petition
Right to privacy
Right to protest
Right to refuse medical treatment
Right to resist
Right of self-defense
Right to truth
Security of person
Suffrage
Right to homeland
Economic, socialand cultural
Digital rights
Equal pay for equal work
Fair remuneration
Labor rights
Right to an adequate standard of living
Right to clothing
Right to development
Right to education
Right to food
Right to health
Right to a healthy environment
Right to housing
Right to Internet access
Right to property
Right to public participation
Right of reply
Right to rest and leisure
Right of return
Right to science and culture
Right to social security
Right to water
Right to work
Sexual andreproductive
Abortion
Family planning
Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Sexual and reproductive health
Right to sexuality
Violations
Crimes against humanity
Genocide
War crimes
vteMedia cultureMedia
24-hour news cycle
Alternative media
Digital media
Electronic media
Mass media
Mainstream media
New media
News broadcasting
News media
Old media
Social media
State media
Ideology
Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pens e unique
Pop music
DeceptionForms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Philosophers
Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan
Jacques Ranci re
Counterculture
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Review bomb
Strike action
In academia
Influence of mass media
Media studies
Mediatization
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd
Issues
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Social influence
Synonyms
Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle
vteCensorshipMedia regulation
Books
books banned
Films
banned films
Internet
circumvention
Music
Postal
Press
Radio
Speech and expression
Student media
Thought
Video games
banned video games
Methods
Bleeping
Book burning
Broadcast delay
Censor bars
Chilling effect
Collateral censorship
Concision
Conspiracy of silence
Content-control software
Damnatio memoriae
Euphemism
Minced oath
Expurgation
Fogging
Gag order
Heckling
Heckler's veto
Internet police
Memory hole
National intranet
Newspaper theft
Pixelization
Prior restraint
Propaganda
Purge
Revisionism
Sanitization
Self-censorship
Speech code
Strategic lawsuit
Surveillance
computer and network
mass
Whitewashing
Word filtering
Contexts
Criminal
Corporate
Apple
Facebook
Google
Hate speech
Online
Ideological
LGBT issues
Media bias
Moralistic fallacy
Naturalistic fallacy
Politics
Propaganda model
Religious
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
By country
Censorship
Chinese issues overseas
Freedom of speech
Internet censorship
Muhammad controversy
vteInternet censorship and surveillance by countryAfrica
Algeria
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo DR
Congo RO
Egypt
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritania
Morocco (Western Sahara)
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Americas
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Greenland
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Puerto Rico
Uruguay
Venezuela
Asia
Afghanistan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
East Timor
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palestinian territories
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
Europe
Albania
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany (YouTube video blocking)
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Oceania
Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea
vteSexual revolutionMain topics
Birth control
Free love
Gay liberation
Die Sexualit t im Kulturkampf
Milestones
Abortion law
Boys in the Sand
Blue Movie
Myra Breckinridge
Deep Throat
Divorce law by country
Freedom of speech
Freedom of the press
Golden Age of Porn
Loving v. Virginia
Miller Test
Obergefell v. Hodges
"Porno chic"
Pornography
Pornography in the United States
Swinging
The Pill (1965)
United States v. One Book Called Ulysses
Slogans
"Make love, not war"
"The personal is political"
Events
AIDS epidemic
Kinsey Reports
Masters and Johnson Institute
Playboy
Protests of 1968
Stonewall riots
Summer of Love
People
Pat Califia
Marilyn Chambers
Aleister Crowley
Gerard Damiano
Betty Dodson
Larry Flynt
Sigmund Freud
Ralph Ginzburg
Al Goldstein
Bob Guccione
Terri Hall
Fred Halsted
Nina Hartley
Hugh Hefner
Magnus Hirschfeld
David Hurles
Virginia Johnson
Alfred Kinsey
Linda Lovelace
Robert Mapplethorpe
William Margold
William Masters
Radley Metzger
Bettie Page
Wilhelm Reich
Marquis de Sade
Margaret Sanger
Annie Sprinkle
Andy Warhol
Ruth Westheimer
Oscar Wilde
Places
55th Street Playhouse
Caldron (sex club)
Catacombs (sex club)
Club Baths
The Factory
Gay bathhouse
LGBT culture
Dallas-Fort Worth
Houston
Miami
New York City
San Francisco
Mineshaft (gay club)
New Andy Warhol Garrick Theatre
Plato's Retreat
Sandstone retreat
South of Market
Related
Counterculture of the 1960s
Feminist views of pornography
Freudo-Marxism
Hippie
Inside Deep Throat (2005 film)
Kinsey (2004 film)
LGBT
Lust
Lovelace (2013 film)
Make Love, Not War: The Sexual Revolution: An Unfettered History (2001 book)
The Notorious Bettie Page (2005 film)
Peace movement
Slut-shaming
Whatever (1994 novel)
vteWestern world and cultureFoundations
Cradle of civilization
Old World
Greco-Roman world
Greece
Rome
Roman Empire
Western
Eastern
Roman legacy
Romanization
Romano-Germanic culture
Christendom
History
European Bronze Age
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
early
high
late
Renaissance
Early modern period
Age of Discovery
Reformation
Age of Enlightenment
Scientific Revolution
Late modern period
Age of Revolution
Abolitionism
Emancipation
Capitalism
Industrial Revolution
Great Divergence
Modern era
World War I
Interwar period
Universal suffrage
World War II
Cold War
Post Cold War era
Information age
War on terror
Culture
Alphabet
Greek
Latin
Cyrillic
Architecture
Art
Periods
Calendar
Cuisine
Diet
Classical tradition
Studies
Clothing
History
Dance
Esotericism
Astrology
Folklore
Law
Languages
Eurolinguistics
Standard Average European
Literature
Canon
Media
Internet
Music
Chant
Classical
Folk
Mythology
Painting (contemporary)
Philosophy
Science
Values
Religion
East West Schism
Western Christianity
Decline
Secularism
Philosophy
Ancient Greek philosophy
Hellenistic philosophy
Ancient Roman philosophy
Judeo-Christian ethics
Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Christian existentialism
Humanism
Christian humanism
Secular humanism
Liberalism
Conservatism
Socialism
Continental philosophy
Analytic philosophy
Post-structuralism
Tolerance
Paradox
Relativism
Peritrope
Atlanticism
Religion
Judaism
Culture
Christianity
Culture
Western/Eastern
Catholic Church
Latin Church
Eastern Orthodoxy
Protestantism
Paganism
Baltic
Celtic
Finnish
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Frankish
Gothic
Old Norse
Hellenistic
Roman
Slavic
Neo
Agnosticism
Atheism
Law
Natural law
Rule of law
Equality before the law
Constitutionalism
Human rights
Life
Thought
Speech
Press
Religion
Property
Democracy
International law
Contemporaryintegration
ABCANZ Armies
Anglo-Portuguese Alliance
ANZUS
Arctic Council
AUKUS
Baltic Assembly
Benelux
British Irish Council
Bucharest Nine
Council of Europe
Craiova Group
EEA
EFTA
ESA
EU
EU Customs Union
Eurozone
EU UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement
Five Eyes
G7
Lancaster House Treaties
Lublin Triangle
NATO
Nordic Council
OAS
OSCE
Pacific Islands Forum
PROSUL/PROSUR
Rio Treaty
Schengen
Special Relationship
Three Seas Initiative
USMCA
Visegr d Group
West Nordic Council
Western Bloc
Western European and Others Group
Westernization
Portals: Freedom of speech Internet Journalism Law Philosophy Society Writing
Authority control International
FAST
National
Spain
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freedom_of_speech&oldid=1149513758"