World War II general and 34th president of the United States
"Dwight David Eisenhower" and "Eisenhower" redirect here. For his grandson, see David Eisenhower. For other uses, see Eisenhower (disambiguation).
Dwight D. EisenhowerOfficial portrait, 195934th President of the United StatesIn officeJanuary 20, 1953  January 20, 1961Vice PresidentRichard NixonPreceded byHarry S. TrumanSucceeded byJohn F. Kennedy1st Supreme Allied Commander EuropeIn officeApril 2, 1951  May 30, 1952PresidentHarry S. TrumanDeputyBernard MontgomeryPreceded byPosition establishedSucceeded byMatthew Ridgway16th Chief of Staff of the ArmyIn officeNovember 19, 1945  February 6, 1948PresidentHarry S. TrumanDeputyJ. Lawton CollinsPreceded byGeorge C. MarshallSucceeded byOmar BradleyMilitary Governor of the U.S. Occupation Zone in GermanyIn officeMay 8, 1945  November 10, 1945PresidentHarry S. TrumanPreceded byPosition establishedSucceeded byGeorge S. Patton (acting)13th President of Columbia UniversityIn officeJune 7, 1948  January 19, 1953Preceded byFrank D. Fackenthal (acting)Succeeded byGrayson L. Kirk
Personal detailsBornDavid Dwight Eisenhower(1890-10-14)October 14, 1890Denison, Texas, U.S.DiedMarch 28, 1969(1969-03-28) (aged 78)Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, D.C., U.S.Resting placeDwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood HomePolitical partyRepublican (from 1952)SpouseMamie Doud  (m. 1916) ChildrenDoudJohnParents
David Jacob Eisenhower
Ida Stover
RelativesFamily of Dwight D. EisenhowerEducationUnited States Military Academy (BS)OccupationPoliticianmilitary officerSignatureNickname"Ike"[1]Military serviceBranch/serviceUnited States ArmyYears of service
1915 1953
1961 1969[2]
RankGeneral of the ArmyBattles/wars
Pancho Villa Expedition
World War I
World War II
Awards
Army Distinguished Service Medal (5)
Navy Distinguished Service Medal
Legion of Merit
Full list
Eisenhower's voice
Dwight D. Eisenhower's first Inaugural Address, January 20, 1953
This article is part of a series aboutDwight D. Eisenhower
Early Life
Military Career
World War II
Supreme Allied Commander in Europe
D-Day
Operation Overlord
Surrender of Germany
VE-Day
Crusade in Europe
34th President of the United States
Presidency
Timeline
Transition
Inaugurations
first
second
First Term
Korean War
Atoms for Peace
Cold War
New Look
Domino theory
Interstate Highway System
Second Term
Eisenhower Doctrine
Sputnik crisis
Missile gap
NDEA
NASA
DARPA
Civil Rights Act of 1957
Little Rock Nine
Admission of states
Alaska
Hawaii
U-2 incident
Farewell Address
Kennedy transition
Presidential campaigns
1952 campaign
Draft movement
Election
1956 campaign
Election
Post-Presidency
Legacy
Presidential library and museum
Tributes and memorials
 
vte
Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower (/ a z nha . r/ EYE-z n-how- r; born David Dwight Eisenhower; October 14, 1890   March 28, 1969) was an American military officer and statesman who served as the 34th president of the United States from 1953 to 1961. During World War II, he served as Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe and achieved the five-star rank as General of the Army. Eisenhower planned and supervised two of the most consequential military campaigns of World War II:  Operation Torch in the North Africa campaign in 1942 1943 and the D-Day invasion of Normandy in 1944.
Eisenhower was born into a large family of mostly Pennsylvania Dutch ancestry in Denison, Texas, and raised in Abilene, Kansas. His family had a strong religious background, and his mother became a Jehovah's Witness. Eisenhower, however, belonged to no organized church until 1952. He graduated from West Point in 1915 and later married Mamie Doud, with whom he had two sons. During World War I, he was denied a request to serve in Europe and instead commanded a unit that trained tank crews. Following the war, he served under various generals and was promoted to the rank of brigadier general in 1941. After the United States entered World War II, Eisenhower oversaw the invasions of North Africa and Sicily before supervising the invasions of France and Germany. After the war, he served as Army Chief of Staff (1945 1948), as president of Columbia University (1948 1953), and as the first Supreme Commander of NATO (1951 1952).
In 1952, Eisenhower entered the presidential race as a Republican to block the isolationist foreign policies of Senator Robert A. Taft, who opposed NATO and wanted no foreign entanglements. Eisenhower won that election and the 1956 election in landslides, both times defeating Adlai Stevenson II. Eisenhower's main goals in office were to contain the spread of communism and reduce federal deficits. In 1953, he considered using nuclear weapons to end the Korean War and may have threatened China with nuclear attack if an armistice was not reached quickly. China did agree and an armistice resulted, which remains in effect. His New Look policy of nuclear deterrence prioritized "inexpensive" nuclear weapons while reducing funding for expensive Army divisions. He continued Harry S. Truman's policy of recognizing Taiwan as the legitimate government of China, and he won congressional approval of the Formosa Resolution. His administration provided major aid to help the French fight off Vietnamese Communists in the First Indochina War. After the French left, he gave strong financial support to the new state of South Vietnam. He supported regime-changing military coups in Iran and Guatemala orchestrated by his own administration. During the Suez Crisis of 1956, he condemned the Israeli, British, and French invasion of Egypt, and he forced them to withdraw. He also condemned the Soviet invasion during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 but took no action. He deployed 15,000 soldiers during the 1958 Lebanon crisis. Near the end of his term, a summit meeting with the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was cancelled when a U.S. spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union. Eisenhower approved the Bay of Pigs Invasion, which was left to John F. Kennedy to carry out.
On the domestic front, Eisenhower governed as a moderate conservative who continued New Deal agencies and expanded Social Security. He covertly opposed Joseph McCarthy and contributed to the end of McCarthyism by openly invoking executive privilege. He signed the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and sent Army troops to enforce federal court orders which integrated schools in Little Rock, Arkansas. His administration undertook the development and construction of the Interstate Highway System, which remains the largest construction of roadways in American history. In 1957, following the Soviet launch of Sputnik, Eisenhower led the American response which included the creation of NASA and the establishment of a stronger, science-based education via the National Defense Education Act. Following the establishment of NASA, the Soviet Union began to reinforce their own space program, escalating the Space Race. His two terms saw unprecedented economic prosperity except for a minor recession in 1958. In his farewell address to the nation, he expressed his concerns about the dangers of massive military spending, particularly deficit spending and government contracts to private military manufacturers, which he dubbed "the military industrial complex". Historical evaluations of his presidency place him among the upper tier of American presidents.
Family background
Further information: Family of Dwight D. Eisenhower
The Eisenhauer (German for "iron hewer or "iron miner") family migrated from the German village of Karlsbrunn to the Province of Pennsylvania in 1741, initially settling in York, Pennsylvania. The family moved to Kansas in the 1880s.[3] Accounts vary as to how and when the German name Eisenhauer was anglicized to Eisenhower.[4] Eisenhower's Pennsylvania Dutch ancestors, who were primarily farmers, included Hans Nikolaus Eisenhauer of Karlsbrunn, who migrated in 1741 to Lancaster, Pennsylvania.[5]
Hans's great-great-grandson, David Jacob Eisenhower (1863 1942), Eisenhower's father, was a college-educated engineer, despite his own father Jacob's urging to stay on the family farm. Eisenhower's mother, Ida Elizabeth (Stover) Eisenhower, born in Virginia, of predominantly German Protestant ancestry, moved to Kansas from Virginia. She married David on September 23, 1885, in Lecompton, Kansas, on the campus of their alma mater, Lane University.[6] Dwight David Eisenhower's lineage also included English ancestors (on both sides) and Scottish ancestors (through his maternal line).[7][8]
David owned a general store in Hope, Kansas, but the business failed due to economic conditions and the family became impoverished. The Eisenhowers then lived in Texas from 1889 until 1892, and later returned to Kansas, with $24 (equivalent to $724 in 2021) to their name at the time. David worked as a railroad mechanic and then at a creamery.[6] By 1898, the parents made a decent living and provided a suitable home for their large family.[9]
Early life and education
 The Eisenhower family home in Abilene, Kansas
Eisenhower was born David Dwight Eisenhower in Denison, Texas, on October 14, 1890, the third of seven sons born to Ida Stover and David J. Eisenhower.[10] His mother soon reversed his two forenames after his birth to avoid the confusion of having two Davids in the family.[11] All of the boys were nicknamed "Ike", such as "Big Ike" (Edgar) and "Little Ike" (Eisenhower); the nickname was intended as an abbreviation of their last name.[12] By World War II, only Eisenhower was still called "Ike".[3]
In 1892, the family moved to Abilene, Kansas, which Eisenhower considered his hometown.[3] As a child, he was involved in an accident that cost his younger brother Earl an eye, for which he was remorseful for the remainder of his life.[13] Eisenhower developed a keen and enduring interest in exploring the outdoors. He learned about hunting and fishing, cooking, and card playing from an illiterate man named Bob Davis who camped on the Smoky Hill River.[14][15][16] While his mother was against war, it was her collection of history books that first sparked Eisenhower's early and lasting interest in military history. He persisted in reading the books in her collection and became a voracious reader on the subject. Other favorite subjects early in his education were arithmetic and spelling.[17]
His parents set aside specific times at breakfast and at dinner for daily family Bible reading. Chores were regularly assigned and rotated among all the children, and misbehavior was met with unequivocal discipline, usually from David.[18] His mother, previously a member (with David) of the River Brethren sect of the Mennonites, joined the International Bible Students Association, later known as Jehovah's Witnesses. The Eisenhower home served as the local meeting hall from 1896 to 1915, though Eisenhower never joined the International Bible Students.[19] His later decision to attend West Point saddened his mother, who felt that warfare was "rather wicked", but she did not overrule his decision.[20] While speaking of himself in 1948, Eisenhower said he was "one of the most deeply religious men I know" though unattached to any "sect or organization". He was baptized in the Presbyterian Church in 1953.[21]
Eisenhower attended Abilene High School and graduated with the class of 1909.[22] As a freshman, he injured his knee and developed a leg infection that extended into his groin, which his doctor diagnosed as life-threatening. The doctor insisted that the leg be amputated but Dwight refused to allow it, and surprisingly recovered, though he had to repeat his freshman year.[23] He and brother Edgar both wanted to attend college, though they lacked the funds. They made a pact to take alternate years at college while the other worked to earn the tuitions.[24]
Edgar took the first turn at school, and Dwight was employed as a night supervisor at the Belle Springs Creamery.[25] When Edgar asked for a second year, Dwight consented and worked for a second year. At that time, a friend Edward "Swede" Hazlett was applying to the Naval Academy and urged Dwight to apply to the school, since no tuition was required. Eisenhower requested consideration for either Annapolis or West Point with his U.S. Senator, Joseph L. Bristow. Though Eisenhower was among the winners of the entrance-exam competition, he was beyond the age limit for the Naval Academy.[26] He then accepted an appointment to West Point in 1911.[26]
 Eisenhower (third from left) and Omar Bradley (rightmost) were members of the 1912 West Point football team.
At West Point, Eisenhower relished the emphasis on traditions and on sports, but was less enthusiastic about the hazing, though he willingly accepted it as a plebe. He was also a regular violator of the more detailed regulations and finished school with a less than stellar discipline rating. Academically, Eisenhower's best subject by far was English. Otherwise, his performance was average, though he thoroughly enjoyed the typical emphasis of engineering on science and mathematics.[27]
In athletics, Eisenhower later said that "not making the baseball team at West Point was one of the greatest disappointments of my life, maybe my greatest".[28] He made the varsity football team[29][30] and was a starter at halfback in 1912, when he tried to tackle the legendary Jim Thorpe of the Carlisle Indians.[31] Eisenhower suffered a torn knee while being tackled in the next game, which was the last he played; he reinjured his knee on horseback and in the boxing ring,[3][14][32] so he turned to fencing and gymnastics.[3]
 West Point yearbook photo, 1915
Eisenhower later served as junior varsity football coach and cheerleader, which caught the attention of General Frederick Funston.[33] He graduated from West Point in the middle of the class of 1915,[34] which became known as "the class the stars fell on", because 59 members eventually became general officers. After graduation in 1915, Second Lieutenant Eisenhower requested an assignment in the Philippines, which was denied; because of the ongoing Mexican Revolution, he was instead posted to Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas, under the command of General Funston. In 1916, while stationed at Fort Sam Houston, Eisenhower was convinced by Funston to become the football coach for Peacock Military Academy,[33] and later became the coach at St. Louis College, now St. Mary's University;[35] Eisenhower was an honorary member of the Sigma Beta Chi fraternity at St. Mary's University.[36]
Personal life
Main article: Family of Dwight D. Eisenhower
While Eisenhower was stationed in Texas, he met Mamie Doud of Boone, Iowa.[3] They were immediately taken with each other. He proposed to her on Valentine's Day in 1916.[37] A November wedding date in Denver was moved up to July 1 due to the impending U.S. entry into World War I; Funston approved 10 days of leave for their wedding.[38] The Eisenhowers moved many times during their first 35 years of marriage.[39]
The Eisenhowers had two sons. In late 1917 while he was in charge of training at Fort Oglethorpe in Georgia, his wife Mamie had their first son, Doud Dwight "Icky" Eisenhower (1917 1921), who died of scarlet fever at the age of three.[40] Eisenhower was mostly reluctant to discuss his death.[41] Their second son, John Eisenhower (1922 2013), was born in Denver, Colorado.[42] John served in the United States Army, retired as a brigadier general, became an author and served as U.S. Ambassador to Belgium from 1969 to 1971. Coincidentally, John graduated from West Point on D-Day, June 6, 1944. He married Barbara Jean Thompson on June 10, 1947. John and Barbara had four children: David, Barbara Ann, Susan Elaine and Mary Jean. David, after whom Camp David is named,[43] married Richard Nixon's daughter Julie in 1968.
 Mamie Eisenhower, painted in 1953 by Thomas E. Stephens
Eisenhower was a golf enthusiast later in life, and he joined the Augusta National Golf Club in 1948.[44] He played golf frequently during and after his presidency and was unreserved in expressing his passion for the game, to the point of golfing during winter; he ordered his golf balls painted black so he could see them better against snow on the ground. He had a small, basic golf facility installed at Camp David, and he became close friends with the Augusta National Chairman Clifford Roberts, inviting Roberts to stay at the White House on numerous occasions.[45] Roberts, an investment broker, also handled the Eisenhower family's investments.[46]
Oil painting was one of Eisenhower's hobbies.[41] He began painting while at Columbia University, after watching Thomas E. Stephens paint Mamie's portrait. In order to relax, Eisenhower painted about 260 oils during the last 20 years of his life. The images were mostly landscapes but also portraits of subjects such as Mamie, their grandchildren, General Montgomery, George Washington, and Abraham Lincoln.[47] Wendy Beckett stated that Eisenhower's paintings, "simple and earnest," caused her to "wonder at the hidden depths of this reticent president". A conservative in both art and politics, Eisenhower in a 1962 speech denounced modern art as "a piece of canvas that looks like a broken-down Tin Lizzie, loaded with paint, has been driven over it".[41]
Angels in the Outfield was Eisenhower's favorite movie.[48] His favorite reading material for relaxation were the Western novels of Zane Grey.[49] With his excellent memory and ability to focus, Eisenhower was skilled at card games. He learned poker, which he called his "favorite indoor sport", in Abilene. Eisenhower recorded West Point classmates' poker losses for payment after graduation and later stopped playing because his opponents resented having to pay him. A friend reported that after learning to play contract bridge at West Point, Eisenhower played the game six nights a week for five months.[50] Eisenhower continued to play bridge throughout his military career. While stationed in the Philippines, he played regularly with President Manuel Quezon, earning him the nickname the "Bridge Wizard of Manila".[51] During WWII, an unwritten qualification for an officer's appointment to Eisenhower's staff was the ability to play a sound game of bridge. He played even during the stressful weeks leading up to the D-Day landings. His favorite partner was General Alfred Gruenther, considered the best player in the U.S. Army; he appointed Gruenther his second-in-command at NATO partly because of his skill at bridge. Saturday night bridge games at the White House were a feature of his presidency. He was a strong player, though not an expert by modern standards. The great bridge player and popularizer Ely Culbertson described his game as classic and sound with "flashes of brilliance" and said that "you can always judge a man's character by the way he plays cards. Eisenhower is a calm and collected player and never whines at his losses. He is brilliant in victory but never commits the bridge player's worst crime of gloating when he wins." Bridge expert Oswald Jacoby frequently participated in the White House games and said, "The President plays better bridge than golf. He tries to break 90 at golf. At bridge, you would say he plays in the 70s."[52]
World War I (1914 1918)
See also: Military career of Dwight D. Eisenhower
Eisenhower served initially in logistics and then the infantry at various camps in Texas and Georgia until 1918. When the U.S. entered World War I, he immediately requested an overseas assignment but was again denied and then assigned to Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas.[53] In February 1918, he was transferred to Camp Meade in Maryland with the 65th Engineers. His unit was later ordered to France, but, to his chagrin, he received orders for the new tank corps, where he was promoted to brevet lieutenant colonel in the National Army.[54] He commanded a unit that trained tank crews at Camp Colt  his first command  at the site of "Pickett's Charge" on the Gettysburg Civil War battleground. Though Eisenhower and his tank crews never saw combat, he displayed excellent organizational skills as well as an ability to accurately assess junior officers' strengths and make optimal placements of personnel.[55]
Once again his spirits were raised when the unit under his command received orders overseas to France. This time his wishes were thwarted when the armistice was signed a week before his departure date.[56] Completely missing out on the warfront left him depressed and bitter for a time, despite receiving the Distinguished Service Medal for his work at home.[57] In World War II, rivals who had combat service in the Great War (led by Gen. Bernard Montgomery) sought to denigrate Eisenhower for his previous lack of combat duty, despite his stateside experience establishing a camp, completely equipped, for thousands of troops and developing a full combat training schedule.[58]
In service of generals
 Eisenhower (far right) with three friends (William Stuhler, Major Brett, and Paul V. Robinson) in 1919, four years after graduating from West Point
After the war, Eisenhower reverted to his regular rank of captain and a few days later was promoted to major, a rank he held for 16 years.[5] The major was assigned in 1919 to a transcontinental Army convoy to test vehicles and dramatize the need for improved roads in the nation. Indeed, the convoy averaged only 5 miles per hour (8.0 km/h) from Washington, D.C. to San Francisco; later the improvement of highways became a signature issue for Eisenhower as president.[59]
He assumed duties again at Camp Meade, Maryland, commanding a battalion of tanks, where he remained until 1922. His schooling continued, focused on the nature of the next war and the role of the tank in it. His new expertise in tank warfare was strengthened by a close collaboration with George S. Patton, Sereno E. Brett, and other senior tank leaders. Their leading-edge ideas of speed-oriented offensive tank warfare were strongly discouraged by superiors, who considered the new approach too radical and preferred to continue using tanks in a strictly supportive role for the infantry. Eisenhower was even threatened with court-martial for continued publication of these proposed methods of tank deployment, and he relented.[60][61]
From 1920, Eisenhower served under a succession of talented generals  Fox Conner, John J. Pershing, Douglas MacArthur and George Marshall. He first became executive officer to General Conner in the Panama Canal Zone, where, joined by Mamie, he served until 1924. Under Conner's tutelage, he studied military history and theory (including Carl von Clausewitz's On War), and later cited Conner's enormous influence on his military thinking, saying in 1962 that "Fox Conner was the ablest man I ever knew." Conner's comment on Eisenhower was, "[He] is one of the most capable, efficient and loyal officers I have ever met."[62] On Conner's recommendation, in 1925 1926 he attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, where he graduated first in a class of 245 officers.[63][64] He then served as a battalion commander at Fort Benning, Georgia, until 1927.
During the late 1920s and early 1930s, Eisenhower's career in the post-war army stalled somewhat, as military priorities diminished; many of his friends resigned for high-paying business jobs. He was assigned to the American Battle Monuments Commission directed by General Pershing, and with the help of his brother Milton Eisenhower, then a journalist at the U.S. Agriculture Department, he produced a guide to American battlefields in Europe.[65] He then was assigned to the Army War College and graduated in 1928. After a one-year assignment in France, Eisenhower served as executive officer to General George V. Moseley, Assistant Secretary of War, from 1929 to February 1933.[66] Major Dwight D. Eisenhower graduated from the Army Industrial College (Washington, DC) in 1933 and later served on the faculty (it was later expanded to become the Industrial College of the Armed Services and is now known as the Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy).[67][68]
His primary duty was planning for the next war, which proved most difficult in the midst of the Great Depression.[69] He then was posted as chief military aide to General Douglas MacArthur, Army Chief of Staff. In 1932, he participated in the clearing of the Bonus March encampment in Washington, D.C. Although he was against the actions taken against the veterans and strongly advised MacArthur against taking a public role in it, he later wrote the Army's official incident report, endorsing MacArthur's conduct.[70][71]
Philippine tenure
In 1935, he accompanied MacArthur to the Philippines, where he served as assistant military adviser to the Philippine government in developing their army. MacArthur allowed Eisenhower to handpick an officer whom he thought would contribute much to the mission. Hence he chose James Ord, a fellow classmate of him at West Point Academy. Having been brought up in Mexico, which inculcated into him the Spanish culture in which both the Mexico and the Philippines had similarities, Ord was deemed as the right pick for the job. Eisenhower had strong philosophical disagreements with MacArthur regarding the role of the Philippine Army and the leadership qualities that an American army officer should exhibit and develop in his subordinates. The antipathy between Eisenhower and MacArthur lasted the rest of their lives.[72]
After quite some time, on December of 1935, after realizing that the mission of constructing a well-sound plan for the creation of the Philippine Army was very lagging behind, his optimistic character turned into a bleak state, all the more when in 1936, Eisenhower was entrusted with the responsibility of finding the right officer who would train the fresh recruits; there was simply not enough manpower for potential instructors. 
Historians have concluded that this assignment provided valuable preparation for handling the challenging personalities of Winston Churchill, George S. Patton, George Marshall, and Bernard Montgomery during World War II. Eisenhower later emphasized that too much had been made of the disagreements with MacArthur and that a positive relationship endured.[73] While in Manila, Mamie suffered a life-threatening stomach ailment but recovered fully. Eisenhower was promoted to the rank of permanent lieutenant colonel in 1936. He also learned to fly, making a solo flight over the Philippines in 1937, and obtained his private pilot's license in 1939 at Fort Lewis.[74][75] Also around this time, he was offered a post by the Philippine Commonwealth Government, namely by then Philippine President Manuel L. Quezon on recommendations by MacArthur, to become the chief of police of a new capital being planned, now named Quezon City, but he declined the offer.[76]
Eisenhower returned to the United States in December 1939 and was assigned as commanding officer (CO) of the 1st Battalion, 15th Infantry Regiment at Fort Lewis, Washington, later becoming the regimental executive officer. In March 1941 he was promoted to colonel and assigned as chief of staff of the newly activated IX Corps under Major General Kenyon Joyce. In June 1941, he was appointed chief of staff to General Walter Krueger, Commander of the Third Army, at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas. After successfully participating in the Louisiana Maneuvers, he was promoted to brigadier general on October 3, 1941.[77][78] Although his administrative abilities had been noticed, on the eve of the American entry into World War II he had never held an active command above a battalion and was far from being considered by many as a potential commander of major operations.
World War II (1939 1945)
After the  Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Eisenhower was assigned to the General Staff in Washington, where he served until June 1942 with responsibility for creating the major war plans to defeat Japan and Germany. He was appointed Deputy Chief in charge of Pacific Defenses under the Chief of War Plans Division (WPD), General Leonard T. Gerow, and then succeeded Gerow as Chief of the War Plans Division. Next, he was appointed Assistant Chief of Staff in charge of the new Operations Division (which replaced WPD) under Chief of Staff General George C. Marshall, who spotted talent and promoted accordingly.[79]
At the end of May 1942, Eisenhower accompanied Lt. Gen. Henry H. Arnold, commanding general of the Army Air Forces, to London to assess the effectiveness of the theater commander in England, Maj. Gen. James E. Chaney.[80] He returned to Washington on June 3 with a pessimistic assessment, stating he had an "uneasy feeling" about Chaney and his staff. On June 23, 1942, he returned to London as Commanding General, European Theater of Operations (ETOUSA), based in London and with a house on Coombe, Kingston upon Thames,[81] and took over command of ETOUSA from Chaney.[82] He was promoted to lieutenant general on July 7.
Operations Torch and Avalanche
 Eisenhower as a major general, 1942
In November 1942, Eisenhower was also appointed Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force of the North African Theater of Operations (NATOUSA) through the new operational Headquarters Allied (Expeditionary) Force Headquarters (A(E)FHQ). The word "expeditionary" was dropped soon after his appointment for security reasons.[failed verification] The campaign in North Africa was designated Operation Torch and was planned in the underground headquarters within the Rock of Gibraltar. Eisenhower was the first non-British person to command Gibraltar in 200 years.[83]
French cooperation was deemed necessary to the campaign and Eisenhower encountered a "preposterous situation"[according to whom?] with the multiple rival factions in France. His primary objective was to move forces successfully into Tunisia and intending to facilitate that objective, he gave his support to Fran ois Darlan as High Commissioner in North Africa, despite Darlan's previous high offices of state in Vichy France and his continued role as commander-in-chief of the French armed forces. The Allied leaders were "thunderstruck"[according to whom?] by this from a political standpoint, though none of them had offered Eisenhower guidance with the problem in the course of planning the operation. Eisenhower was severely criticized[by whom?] for the move. Darlan was assassinated on December 24 by 
Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle, a French antifascist monarchist.[84] Eisenhower later appointed, as High Commissioner, General Henri Giraud, who had been installed by the Allies as Darlan's commander-in-chief.[85]
 General Eisenhower, General Patton (standing to the left) and President Roosevelt in Sicily, 1943
Operation Torch also served as a valuable training ground for Eisenhower's combat command skills; during the initial phase of Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel's move into the Kasserine Pass, Eisenhower created some confusion in the ranks by some interference with the execution of battle plans by his subordinates. He also was initially indecisive in his removal of Lloyd Fredendall, commanding U.S. II Corps. He became more adroit in such matters in later campaigns.[86] In February 1943, his authority was extended as commander of AFHQ across the Mediterranean basin to include the British Eighth Army, commanded by General Sir Bernard Montgomery. The Eighth Army had advanced across the Western Desert from the east and was ready for the start of the Tunisia Campaign. Eisenhower gained his fourth star and gave up command of ETOUSA to become commander of NATOUSA.
After the capitulation of Axis forces in North Africa, Eisenhower oversaw the invasion of Sicily. Once Mussolini, the Italian leader, had fallen in Italy, the Allies switched their attention to the mainland with Operation Avalanche. But while Eisenhower argued with President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, who both insisted on unconditional terms of surrender in exchange for helping the Italians, the Germans pursued an aggressive buildup of forces in the country. The Germans made the already tough battle more difficult by adding 19 divisions and initially outnumbering the Allied forces 2 to 1.[87]
Supreme Allied commander and Operation Overlord
In December 1943, President Roosevelt decided that Eisenhower  not Marshall  would be Supreme Allied Commander in Europe. The following month, he resumed command of ETOUSA and the following month was officially designated as the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), serving in a dual role until the end of hostilities in Europe in May 1945.[88] He was charged in these positions with planning and carrying out the Allied assault on the coast of Normandy in June 1944 under the code name Operation Overlord, the liberation of Western Europe and the invasion of Germany.
 Eisenhower speaks with men of the 502nd Parachute Infantry Regiment (PIR), part of the 101st "Screaming Eagles" Airborne Division, on June 5, 1944, the day before the D-Day invasion. The officer Eisenhower is speaking to is First Lieutenant Wallace Strobel.
Eisenhower, as well as the officers and troops under him, had learned valuable lessons in their previous operations, and their skills had all strengthened in preparation for the next most difficult campaign against the Germans a beach landing assault. His first struggles, however, were with Allied leaders and officers on matters vital to the success of the Normandy invasion; he argued with Roosevelt over an essential agreement with De Gaulle to use French resistance forces in covert and sabotage operations against the Germans in advance of Operation Overlord.[89] Admiral Ernest J. King fought with Eisenhower over King's refusal to provide additional landing craft from the Pacific.[90] Eisenhower also insisted that the British give him exclusive command over all strategic air forces to facilitate Overlord, to the point of threatening to resign unless Churchill relented, which he did.[91] Eisenhower then designed a bombing plan in France in advance of Overlord and argued with Churchill over the latter's concern with civilian casualties; de Gaulle interjected that the casualties were justified in shedding the yoke of the Germans, and Eisenhower prevailed.[92] He also had to skillfully manage to retain the services of the often unruly George S. Patton, by severely reprimanding him when Patton earlier had slapped a subordinate, and then when Patton gave a speech in which he made improper comments about postwar policy.[93]
 From left, front row includes army officers Simpson, Patton, Spaatz, Eisenhower, Bradley, Hodges and Gerow in 1945
The D-Day Normandy landings on June 6, 1944, were costly but successful. Two months later (August 15), the invasion of Southern France took place, and control of forces in the southern invasion passed from the AFHQ to the SHAEF. Many thought that victory in Europe would come by summer's end, but the Germans did not capitulate for almost a year. From then until the end of the war in Europe on May 8, 1945, Eisenhower, through SHAEF, commanded all Allied forces, and through his command of ETOUSA had administrative command of all U.S. forces on the Western Front north of the Alps. He was ever mindful of the inevitable loss of life and suffering that would be experienced on an individual level by the troops under his command and their families. This prompted him to make a point of visiting every division involved in the invasion.[94] Eisenhower's sense of responsibility was underscored by his draft of a statement to be issued if the invasion failed. It has been called one of the great speeches of history:
Our landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain a satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. My decision to attack at this time and place was based on the best information available. The troops, the air and the Navy did all that bravery and devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt, it is mine alone.[95]
Liberation of France and victory in Europe
 Eisenhower with Allied commanders following the signing of the German Instrument of Surrender at Reims
Every ground commander seeks the battle of annihilation; so far as conditions permit, he tries to duplicate in modern war the classic example of Cannae Eisenhower[96]
Once the coastal assault had succeeded, Eisenhower insisted on retaining personal control over the land battle strategy, and was immersed in the command and supply of multiple assaults through France on Germany. Field Marshal Montgomery insisted priority be given to his 21st Army Group's attack being made in the north, while Generals Bradley (12th U.S. Army Group) and Devers (Sixth U.S. Army Group) insisted they be given priority in the center and south of the front (respectively). Eisenhower worked tirelessly to address the demands of the rival commanders to optimize Allied forces, often by giving them tactical latitude; many historians conclude this delayed the Allied victory in Europe. However, due to Eisenhower's persistence, the pivotal supply port at Antwerp was successfully, albeit belatedly, opened in late 1944.[97]
 Eisenhower as General of the Army, 1945
In recognition of his senior position in the Allied command, on December 20, 1944, he was promoted to General of the Army, equivalent to the rank of Field Marshal in most European armies. In this and the previous high commands he held, Eisenhower showed his great talents for leadership and diplomacy. Although he had never seen action himself, he won the respect of front-line commanders. He interacted adeptly with allies such as Winston Churchill, Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery and General Charles de Gaulle. He had serious disagreements with Churchill and Montgomery over questions of strategy, but these rarely upset his relationships with them. He dealt with Soviet Marshal Zhukov, his Russian counterpart, and they became good friends.[98]
In December 1944, the Germans launched a surprise counteroffensive, the Battle of the Bulge, which the Allies turned back in early 1945 after Eisenhower repositioned his armies and improved weather allowed the Army Air Force to engage.[99] German defenses continued to deteriorate on both the Eastern Front with the Red Army and the Western Front with the Western Allies. The British wanted to capture Berlin, but Eisenhower decided it would be a military mistake for him to attack Berlin, and said orders to that effect would have to be explicit. The British backed down but then wanted Eisenhower to move into Czechoslovakia for political reasons. Washington refused to support Churchill's plan to use Eisenhower's army for political maneuvers against Moscow. The actual division of Germany followed the lines that Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin had previously agreed upon. The Soviet Red Army captured Berlin in a very bloody large-scale battle, and the Germans finally surrendered on May 7, 1945.[100]
In 1945, Eisenhower anticipated that someday an attempt would be made to recharacterize Nazi crimes as propaganda (Holocaust denial) and took steps against it by demanding extensive still and movie photographic documentation of Nazi death camps.[101]
After World War II (1945 1953)
Military Governor in Germany and Army Chief of Staff
 General Eisenhower served as military governor of the American zone (highlighted) in Allied-occupied Germany from May through November 1945.
Following the German unconditional surrender, Eisenhower was appointed military governor of the American occupation zone, located primarily in Southern Germany, and headquartered at the IG Farben Building in Frankfurt am Main. Upon discovery of the Nazi concentration camps, he ordered camera crews to document evidence of the atrocities in them for use in the Nuremberg Trials. He reclassified German prisoners of war (POWs) in U.S. custody as Disarmed Enemy Forces (DEFs), who were no longer subject to the Geneva Convention. Eisenhower followed the orders laid down by the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) in directive JCS 1067 but softened them by bringing in 400,000 tons of food for civilians and allowing more fraternization.[102][103][104] In response to the devastation in Germany, including food shortages and an influx of refugees, he arranged distribution of American food and medical equipment.[105] His actions reflected the new American attitudes of the German people as Nazi victims not villains, while aggressively purging the ex-Nazis.[106][107]
 General Eisenhower (left) in Warsaw, Poland, 1945
In November 1945, Eisenhower returned to Washington to replace Marshall as Chief of Staff of the Army. His main role was the rapid demobilization of millions of soldiers, a job that was delayed by lack of shipping. Eisenhower was convinced in 1946 that the Soviet Union did not want war and that friendly relations could be maintained; he strongly supported the new United Nations and favored its involvement in the control of atomic bombs. However, in formulating policies regarding the atomic bomb and relations with the Soviets, Truman was guided by the U.S. State Department and ignored Eisenhower and the Pentagon. Indeed, Eisenhower had opposed the use of the atomic bomb against the Japanese, writing, "First, the Japanese were ready to surrender and it wasn't necessary to hit them with that awful thing. Second, I hated to see our country be the first to use such a weapon."[108] Initially, Eisenhower hoped for cooperation with the Soviets.[109] He even visited Warsaw in 1945. Invited by Boles aw Bierut and decorated with the highest military decoration, he was shocked by the scale of destruction in the city.[110] However, by mid-1947, as east west tensions over economic recovery in Germany and the Greek Civil War escalated, Eisenhower agreed with a containment policy to stop Soviet expansion.[109]
1948 presidential election
In June 1943, a visiting politician had suggested to Eisenhower that he might become President of the United States after the war. Believing that a general should not participate in politics, Merlo J. Pusey wrote that "figuratively speaking, [Eisenhower] kicked his political-minded visitor out of his office". As others asked him about his political future, Eisenhower told one that he could not imagine wanting to be considered for any political job "from dogcatcher to Grand High Supreme King of the Universe", and another that he could not serve as Army Chief of Staff if others believed he had political ambitions. In 1945, Truman told Eisenhower during the Potsdam Conference that if desired, the president would help the general win the 1948 election,[111] and in 1947 he offered to run as Eisenhower's running mate on the Democratic ticket if MacArthur won the Republican nomination.[112]
As the election approached, other prominent citizens and politicians from both parties urged Eisenhower to run for president. In January 1948, after learning of plans in New Hampshire to elect delegates supporting him for the forthcoming Republican National Convention, Eisenhower stated through the Army that he was "not available for and could not accept nomination to high political office"; "life-long professional soldiers", he wrote, "in the absence of some obvious and overriding reason, [should] abstain from seeking high political office".[111] Eisenhower maintained no political party affiliation during this time. Many believed he was forgoing his only opportunity to be president as Republican Thomas E. Dewey was considered the probable winner and would presumably serve two terms, meaning that Eisenhower, at age 66 in 1956, would be too old to have another chance to run.[113]
President at Columbia University and NATO Supreme Commander
 Eisenhower lighting the Columbia University Yule Log, 1949
 Eisenhower posing in front of Alma Mater at Columbia in 1953
 As president of Columbia, Eisenhower presents an honorary degree to Jawaharlal Nehru.
In 1948, Eisenhower became President of Columbia University, an Ivy League university in New York City, where he was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa.[114] The choice was subsequently characterized as not having been a good fit for either party.[115] During that year, Eisenhower's memoir, Crusade in Europe, was published.[116] Critics regarded it as one of the finest U.S. military memoirs,[citation needed] and it was a major financial success as well.[117] Eisenhower sought the advice of Augusta National's Roberts about the tax implications of this,[117] and in due course Eisenhower's profit on the book was substantially aided by what author David Pietrusza calls "a ruling without precedent" by the U.S. Department of the Treasury.  It held that Eisenhower was not a professional writer, but rather, marketing the lifetime asset of his experiences, and thus he had to pay only capital gains tax on his $635,000 advance instead of the much higher personal tax rate. This ruling saved Eisenhower about $400,000.[118]
Eisenhower's stint as the president of Columbia University was punctuated by his activity within the Council on Foreign Relations, a study group he led as president concerning the political and military implications of the Marshall Plan, and The American Assembly, Eisenhower's "vision of a great cultural center where business, professional and governmental leaders could meet from time to time to discuss and reach conclusions concerning problems of a social and political nature".[119] His biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook suggested that this period served as "the political education of General Eisenhower", since he had to prioritize wide-ranging educational, administrative, and financial demands for the university.[120] Through his involvement in the Council on Foreign Relations, he also gained exposure to economic analysis, which would become the bedrock of his understanding in economic policy. "Whatever General Eisenhower knows about economics, he has learned at the study group meetings," one Aid to Europe member claimed.[121]
Eisenhower accepted the presidency of the university to expand his ability to promote "the American form of democracy" through education.[122] He was clear on this point to the trustees involved in the search committee. He informed them that his main purpose was "to promote the basic concepts of education in a democracy".[122] As a result, he was "almost incessantly" devoted to the idea of the American Assembly, a concept he developed into an institution by the end of 1950.[119]
Within months of beginning his tenure as the president of the university, Eisenhower was requested to advise U.S. Secretary of Defense James Forrestal on the unification of the armed services.[123] About six months after his appointment, he became the informal Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington.[124] Two months later he fell ill with what was diagnosed as acute gastroenteritis, and he spent over a month in recovery at the Augusta National Golf Club.[125] He returned to his post in New York in mid-May, and in July 1949 took a two-month vacation out-of-state.[126] Because the American Assembly had begun to take shape, he traveled around the country during summer and fall 1950, building financial support for it from various sources, including from Columbia Associates, a recently created alumni and benefactor organization for which he had helped recruit members.[127]
Eisenhower was unknowingly building resentment and a reputation among the Columbia University faculty and staff as an absentee president who was using the university for his own interests. As a career military man, he naturally had little in common with the academics.[128]
He did have some successes at Columbia.  Puzzled as to why no American university had undertaken the "continuous study of the causes, conduct and consequences of war",[129] Eisenhower undertook the creation of the Institute of War and Peace Studies, a research facility whose purpose was to "study war as a tragic social phenomenon".[130]  Eisenhower was able to use his network of wealthy friends and acquaintances to secure initial funding for it.[131] Under its founding director, international relations scholar William T. R. Fox, the institute began in 1951 and became a pioneer in International security studies, one that would be emulated by other institutes in the United States and Britain later in the decade.[129] The Institute of War and Peace Studies thus become one of the projects which Eisenhower considered constituted his "unique contribution" to Columbia.[130]
The contacts gained through university and American Assembly fund-raising activities would later become important supporters in Eisenhower's bid for the Republican party nomination and the presidency. Meanwhile, Columbia University's liberal faculty members became disenchanted with the university president's ties to oilmen and businessmen, including Leonard McCollum, the president of Continental Oil; Frank Abrams, the chairman of Standard Oil of New Jersey; Bob Kleberg, the president of the King Ranch; H. J. Porter, a Texas oil executive; Bob Woodruff, the president of the Coca-Cola Corporation; and Clarence Francis, the chairman of General Foods.
As the president of Columbia, Eisenhower gave voice and form to his opinions about the supremacy and difficulties of American democracy. His tenure marked his transformation from military to civilian leadership. His biographer Travis Beal Jacobs also suggested that the alienation of the Columbia faculty contributed to sharp intellectual criticism of him for many years.[132]
The trustees of Columbia University declined to accept Eisenhower's offer to resign in December 1950, when he took an extended leave from the university to become the Supreme Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and he was given operational command of NATO forces in Europe.[133] Eisenhower retired from active service as an army general on June 3, 1952,[134] and he resumed his presidency of Columbia. Meanwhile, Eisenhower had become the Republican Party nominee for president of the United States, a contest that he won on  November 4. Eisenhower tendered his resignation as university president on November 15, 1952, effective January 19, 1953, the day before his inauguration.[135]
NATO did not have strong bipartisan support in Congress at the time that Eisenhower assumed its military command. Eisenhower advised the participating European nations that it would be incumbent upon them to demonstrate their own commitment of troops and equipment to the NATO force before such would come from the war-weary United States.
At home, Eisenhower was more effective in making the case for NATO in Congress than the Truman administration had been. By the middle of 1951, with American and European support, NATO was a genuine military power. Nevertheless, Eisenhower thought that NATO would become a truly European alliance, with the American and Canadian commitments ending after about ten years.[136]
Presidential campaign of 1952
Main article: 1952 United States presidential election
See also: Draft Eisenhower movement
 Eisenhower button from the 1952 campaign
President Truman sensed a broad-based desire for an Eisenhower candidacy for president, and he again pressed him to run for the office as a Democrat in 1951. But Eisenhower voiced his disagreements with the Democrats and declared himself to be a Republican.[137] A "Draft Eisenhower" movement in the Republican Party persuaded him to declare his candidacy in the 1952 presidential election to counter the candidacy of non-interventionist Senator Robert A. Taft. The effort was a long struggle; Eisenhower had to be convinced that political circumstances had created a genuine duty for him to offer himself as a candidate and that there was a mandate from the public for him to be their president. Henry Cabot Lodge and others succeeded in convincing him, and he resigned his command at NATO in June 1952 to campaign full-time.[138]
Eisenhower defeated Taft for the nomination, having won critical delegate votes from Texas. His campaign was noted for the simple slogan "I Like Ike". It was essential to his success that Eisenhower express opposition to Roosevelt's policy at the Yalta Conference and to Truman's policies in Korea and China matters in which he had once participated.[139][140] In defeating Taft for the nomination, it became necessary for Eisenhower to appease the right-wing Old Guard of the Republican Party; his selection of Richard Nixon as the vice-president on the ticket was designed in part for that purpose. Nixon also provided a strong anti-communist reputation, as well as youth to counter Eisenhower's more advanced age.[141]
 1952 electoral vote results
Eisenhower insisted on campaigning in the South in the general election, against the advice of his campaign team, refusing to surrender the region to the Democratic Party. The campaign strategy was dubbed "K1C2" and was intended to focus on attacking the Truman administration on three failures: the Korean War, Communism, and corruption.[142]
Two controversies tested him and his staff during the campaign, but they did not damage the campaign. One involved a report that Nixon had improperly received funds from a secret trust. Nixon spoke out adroitly to avoid potential damage, but the matter permanently alienated the two candidates. The second issue centered on Eisenhower's relented decision to confront the controversial methods of Joseph McCarthy on his home turf in a Wisconsin appearance.[143] Just two weeks before the election, Eisenhower vowed to go to Korea and end the war there. He promised to maintain a strong commitment against Communism while avoiding the topic of NATO; finally, he stressed a corruption-free, frugal administration at home.
Eisenhower defeated Democratic candidate Adlai Stevenson II in a landslide, with an electoral margin of 442 to 89, marking the first Republican return to the White House in 20 years.[140] He also brought a Republican majority in the House, by eight votes, and in the Senate, evenly divided with Vice President Nixon providing Republicans the majority.[144]
Eisenhower was the last president born in the 19th century, and he was the oldest president-elect at age 62 since James Buchanan in 1856.[145] He was the third commanding general of the Army to serve as president, after George Washington and Ulysses S. Grant, and the last not to have held political office prior to becoming president until Donald Trump entered office in January 2017.[146]
Election of 1956
Main article: 1956 United States presidential election
 1956 electoral vote results
The United States presidential election of 1956 was held on November 6, 1956. Eisenhower, the popular incumbent, successfully ran for re-election. The election was a re-match of 1952, as his opponent in 1956 was Stevenson, a former Illinois governor, whom Eisenhower had defeated four years earlier. Compared to the 1952 election, Eisenhower gained Kentucky, Louisiana, and West Virginia from Stevenson, while losing Missouri. His voters were less likely to bring up his leadership record. Instead what stood out this time, "was the response to personal qualities  to his sincerity, his integrity and sense of duty, his virtue as a family man, his religious devotion, and his sheer likeableness."[147]
Presidency (1953 1961)
Main article: Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Dwight D. Eisenhower presidency.
Truman and Eisenhower had minimal discussions about the transition of administrations due to a complete estrangement between them as a result of campaigning.[148] Eisenhower selected Joseph M. Dodge as his budget director, then asked Herbert Brownell Jr. and Lucius D. Clay to make recommendations for his cabinet appointments. He accepted their recommendations without exception; they included John Foster Dulles and George M. Humphrey with whom he developed his closest relationships, as well as Oveta Culp Hobby. His cabinet consisted of several corporate executives and one labor leader, and one journalist dubbed it "eight millionaires and a plumber".[149] The cabinet was known for its lack of personal friends, office seekers, or experienced government administrators. He also upgraded the role of the National Security Council in planning all phases of the Cold War.[150]
Prior to his inauguration, Eisenhower led a meeting of advisors at Pearl Harbor addressing foremost issues; agreed objectives were to balance the budget during his term, to bring the Korean War to an end, to defend vital interests at lower cost through nuclear deterrent, and to end price and wage controls.[151] He also conducted the first pre-inaugural cabinet meeting in history in late 1952; he used this meeting to articulate his anti-communist Russia policy. His inaugural address was also exclusively devoted to foreign policy and included this same philosophy as well as a commitment to foreign trade and the United Nations.[152]
 February 1959 White House portrait
Eisenhower made greater use of press conferences than any previous president, holding almost 200 over his two terms. He saw the benefit of maintaining a good relationship with the press, and he saw value in them as a means of direct communication with the American people.[153]
Throughout his presidency, Eisenhower adhered to a political philosophy of dynamic conservatism.[154] He described himself as a "progressive conservative"[155] and used terms such as "progressive moderate" and "dynamic conservatism" to describe his approach.[156] He continued all the major New Deal programs still in operation, especially Social Security. He expanded its programs and rolled them into the new Cabinet-level agency of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, while extending benefits to an additional ten million workers. He implemented racial integration in the Armed Services in two years, which had not been completed under Truman.[157]
In a private letter, Eisenhower wrote:
Should any party attempt to abolish social security and eliminate labor laws and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history. There is a tiny splinter group of course, that believes you can do these things [...] Their number is negligible and they are stupid.[158]
When the 1954 Congressional elections approached, it became evident that the Republicans were in danger of losing their thin majority in both houses. Eisenhower was among those who blamed the Old Guard for the losses, and he took up the charge to stop suspected efforts by the right wing to take control of the GOP. He then articulated his position as a moderate, progressive Republican: "I have just one purpose ... and that is to build up a strong progressive Republican Party in this country. If the right wing wants a fight, they are going to get it ... before I end up, either this Republican Party will reflect progressivism or I won't be with them anymore."[159]
Eisenhower initially planned on serving only one term, but he remained flexible in case leading Republicans wanted him to run again. He was recovering from a heart attack late in September 1955 when he met with his closest advisors to evaluate the GOP's potential candidates; the group concluded that a second term was well advised, and he announced that he would run again in February 1956.[160][161] Eisenhower was publicly noncommittal about having Nixon as the Vice President on his ticket; the question was an especially important one in light of his heart condition. He personally favored Robert B. Anderson, a Democrat who rejected his offer, so Eisenhower resolved to leave the matter in the hands of the party.[162] In 1956, Eisenhower faced Adlai Stevenson again and won by an even larger landslide, with 457 of 531 electoral votes and 57.6-percent of the popular vote. The level of campaigning was curtailed out of health considerations.[163]
Eisenhower made full use of his valet, chauffeur, and secretarial support; he rarely drove or even dialed a phone number. He was an avid fisherman, golfer, painter, and bridge player, and preferred active rather than passive forms of entertainment.[164] On August 26, 1959, he was aboard the maiden flight of Air Force One, which replaced the Columbine as the presidential aircraft.[165]
Interstate Highway System
Main article: Interstate Highway System
Remarks in Cadillac Square, Detroit
President Eisenhower delivered remarks about the need for a new highway program at Cadillac Square in Detroit on October 29, 1954Text of speech excerpt
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Eisenhower championed and signed the bill that authorized the Interstate Highway System in 1956.[166] He justified the project through the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 as essential to American security during the Cold War. It was believed that large cities would be targets in a possible war, so the highways were designed to facilitate their evacuation and ease military maneuvers.
Eisenhower's goal to create improved highways was influenced by difficulties that he encountered during his involvement in the Army's 1919 Transcontinental Motor Convoy. He was assigned as an observer for the mission, which involved sending a convoy of Army vehicles coast to coast.[167][168] His subsequent experience with the German autobahn limited-access road systems during the concluding stages of World War II convinced him of the benefits of an Interstate Highway System. The system could also be used as a runway for airplanes, which would be beneficial to war efforts. Franklin D. Roosevelt put this system into place with the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1944. He thought that an interstate highway system would be beneficial for military operations and would also provide a measure of continued economic growth for the nation.[169] The legislation initially stalled in Congress over the issuance of bonds to finance the project, but the legislative effort was renewed and Eisenhower signed the law in June 1956.[170]
Foreign policy
Main article: Foreign policy of the Dwight D. Eisenhower administration
 Eisenhower meeting with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser during Nasser's visit to United Nations in New York, September 1960
 Eisenhower visits the Kingdom of Afghanistan and its king Mohammed Zahir Shah in Kabul.
 Eisenhower with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
 U.S. President Eisenhower visits  the Republic of China and its President Chiang Kai-shek in Taipei.
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev during his 11-day U.S. visit as guest of President Eisenhower, September 1959.
In 1953, the Republican Party's Old Guard presented Eisenhower with a dilemma by insisting he disavow the Yalta Agreements as beyond the constitutional authority of the Executive Branch; however, the death of Joseph Stalin in March 1953 made the matter a moot point.[171] At this time, Eisenhower gave his Chance for Peace speech in which he attempted, unsuccessfully, to forestall the nuclear arms race with the Soviet Union by suggesting multiple opportunities presented by peaceful uses of nuclear materials. Biographer Stephen Ambrose opined that this was the best speech of Eisenhower's presidency.[172][173] Eisenhower sought to make foreign markets available to American business, saying that it is a "serious and explicit purpose of our foreign policy, the encouragement of a hospitable climate for investment in foreign nations."[174]
Nevertheless, the Cold War escalated during his presidency. When the Soviet Union successfully tested a hydrogen bomb in late November 1955, Eisenhower, against the advice of Dulles, decided to initiate a disarmament proposal to the Soviets. In an attempt to make their refusal more difficult, he proposed that both sides agree to dedicate fissionable material away from weapons toward peaceful uses, such as power generation. This approach was labeled "Atoms for Peace".[175]
The U.N. speech was well received but the Soviets never acted upon it, due to an overarching concern for the greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal. Indeed, Eisenhower embarked upon a greater reliance on the use of nuclear weapons, while reducing conventional forces, and with them, the overall defense budget, a policy formulated as a result of Project Solarium and expressed in NSC 162/2. This approach became known as the "New Look", and was initiated with defense cuts in late 1953.[176]
In 1955, American nuclear arms policy became one aimed primarily at arms control as opposed to disarmament. The failure of negotiations over arms until 1955 was due mainly to the refusal of the Russians to permit any sort of inspections. In talks located in London that year, they expressed a willingness to discuss inspections; the tables were then turned on Eisenhower when he responded with an unwillingness on the part of the U.S. to permit inspections. In May of that year, the Russians agreed to sign a treaty giving independence to Austria and paved the way for a Geneva summit with the US, UK and France.[177] At the Geneva Conference, Eisenhower presented a proposal called "Open Skies" to facilitate disarmament, which included plans for Russia and the U.S. to provide mutual access to each other's skies for open surveillance of military infrastructure. Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev dismissed the proposal out of hand.[178]
In 1954, Eisenhower articulated the domino theory in his outlook towards communism in Southeast Asia and also in Central America. He believed that if the communists were allowed to prevail in Vietnam, this would cause a succession of countries to fall to communism, from Laos through Malaysia and Indonesia ultimately to India. Likewise, the fall of Guatemala would end with the fall of neighboring Mexico.[179] That year, the loss of North Vietnam to the communists and the rejection of his proposed European Defence Community (EDC) were serious defeats, but he remained optimistic in his opposition to the spread of communism, saying "Long faces don't win wars".[180] As he had threatened the French in their rejection of EDC, he afterwards moved to restore West Germany as a full NATO partner.[181] In 1954, he also induced Congress to create an Emergency Fund for International Affairs in order to support America's use of cultural diplomacy to strengthen international relations throughout Europe during the cold war.[182][183][184][185][186][187][188]
With Eisenhower's leadership and Dulles' direction, CIA activities increased under the pretense of resisting the spread of communism in poorer countries;[189] the CIA in part deposed the leaders of Iran in Operation Ajax, of Guatemala through Operation Pbsuccess, and possibly the newly independent Republic of the Congo (L opoldville).[190] Eisenhower authorized the assassination of Congolese leader Patrice Lumumba in 1960.[191][192][193] However, the plot to poison him was abandoned.[194][195][196] In 1954, Eisenhower wanted to increase surveillance inside the Soviet Union. With Dulles' recommendation, he authorized the deployment of thirty Lockheed U-2's at a cost of $35 million (equivalent to $353.17 million in 2021).[197] He approved an operation by the Central Intelligence Agency in which they recruited operatives in Cuba to carry out an extensive campaign of terrorism and sabotage, kill civilians, and cause economic damage. The CIA also trained and commanded pilots to bomb civilian airfields.[204] The administration also planned the Bay of Pigs Invasion to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba, which John F. Kennedy was left to carry out.[205]
Space Race
Further information: Space Race
 President Eisenhower with Wernher von Braun, 1960
 In the 1970s the reverse of the Eisenhower dollar celebrated America's Moon landings, which began 11 years after NASA was created during Eisenhower's presidency
Eisenhower and the CIA had known since at least January 1957, nine months before Sputnik, that Russia had the capability to launch a small payload into orbit and was likely to do so within a year.[206] He may also privately have welcomed the Soviet satellite for its legal implications: By launching a satellite, the Soviet Union had in effect acknowledged that space was open to anyone who could access it, without needing permission from other nations.
On the whole, Eisenhower's support of the nation's fledgling space program was officially modest until the Soviet launch of Sputnik in 1957, gaining the Cold War enemy enormous prestige around the world. He then launched a national campaign that funded not just space exploration but a major strengthening of science and higher education. The Eisenhower administration determined to adopt a non-aggressive policy that would allow "space-crafts of any state to overfly all states, a region free of military posturing and launch Earth satellites to explore space".[207] His Open Skies Policy attempted to legitimize illegal Lockheed U-2 flyovers and Project Genetrix while paving the way for spy satellite technology to orbit over sovereign territory,[208] however Nikolai Bulganin and Nikita Khrushchev declined Eisenhower's proposal at the Geneva conference in July 1955.[209] In response to Sputnik being launched in October 1957, Eisenhower created NASA as a civilian space agency in October 1958, signed a landmark science education law, and improved relations with American scientists.[210]
Fear spread through the United States that the Soviet Union would invade and spread communism, so Eisenhower wanted to not only create a surveillance satellite to detect any threats but ballistic missiles that would protect the United States. In strategic terms, it was Eisenhower who devised the American basic strategy of nuclear deterrence based upon the triad of B-52 strategic bombers, land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), and Polaris submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs).[211]
NASA planners projected that human spaceflight would pull the United States ahead in the Space Race as well as accomplishing their long time goal; however, in 1960, an Ad Hoc Panel on Man-in-Space concluded that "man-in-space can not be justified" and was too costly.[212] Eisenhower later resented the space program and its gargantuan price tag he was quoted as saying, "Anyone who would spend $40 billion in a race to the moon for national prestige is nuts."[213]
Korean War, Free China and Red China
In late 1952, Eisenhower went to Korea and discovered a military and political stalemate. Once in office, when the Chinese People's Volunteer Army began a buildup in the Kaesong sanctuary, he considered using nuclear weapons if an armistice was not reached. Whether China was informed of the potential for nuclear force is unknown.[214]  His earlier military reputation in Europe was effective with the Chinese communists.[215] The National Security Council, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Strategic Air Command (SAC) devised detailed plans for nuclear war against Red China.[216] With the death of Stalin in early March 1953, Russian support for a Chinese communists hard-line weakened and Red China decided to compromise on the prisoner issue.[217]
 Eisenhower in Korea with General Chung Il-kwon, and Baik Seon-yup, 1952
In July 1953, an armistice took effect with Korea divided along approximately the same boundary as in 1950. The armistice and boundary remain in effect today. The armistice, which concluded despite opposition from Secretary Dulles, South Korean President Syngman Rhee, and also within Eisenhower's party, has been described by biographer Ambrose as the greatest achievement of the administration. Eisenhower had the insight to realize that unlimited war in the nuclear age was unthinkable, and limited war unwinnable.[217]
A point of emphasis in Eisenhower's campaign had been his endorsement of a policy of liberation from communism as opposed to a policy of containment. This remained his preference despite the armistice with Korea.[218] Throughout his terms Eisenhower took a hard-line attitude toward Red China, as demanded by conservative Republicans, with the goal of driving a wedge between Red China and the Soviet Union.[219]
Eisenhower continued Truman's policy of recognizing the Republic of China (Taiwan) as the legitimate government of China, not the Peking (Beijing) regime. There were localized flare-ups when the People's Liberation Army began shelling the islands of Quemoy and Matsu in September 1954. Eisenhower received recommendations embracing every variation of response to the aggression of the Chinese communists. He thought it essential to have every possible option available to him as the crisis unfolded.[220]
The Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty with the Republic of China was signed in December 1954. He requested and secured from Congress their "Free China Resolution" in January 1955, which gave Eisenhower unprecedented power in advance to use military force at any level of his choosing in defense of Free China and the Pescadores. The Resolution bolstered the morale of the Chinese nationalists, and signaled to Beijing that the U.S. was committed to holding the line.[220]
Eisenhower openly threatened the Chinese communists with the use of nuclear weapons, authorizing a series of bomb tests labeled Operation Teapot. Nevertheless, he left the Chinese communists guessing as to the exact nature of his nuclear response. This allowed Eisenhower to accomplish all of his objectives the end of this communist encroachment, the retention of the Islands by the Chinese nationalists and continued peace.[221] Defense of the Republic of China from an invasion remains a core American policy.[222]
By the end of 1954, Eisenhower's military and foreign policy experts the NSC, JCS and State Dept. had unanimously urged him, on no less than five occasions, to launch an atomic attack against Red China; yet he consistently refused to do so and felt a distinct sense of accomplishment in having sufficiently confronted communism while keeping world peace.[223]
Southeast Asia
Early in 1953, the French asked Eisenhower for help in French Indochina against the Communists, supplied from China, who were fighting the First Indochina War. Eisenhower sent Lt. General John W. "Iron Mike" O'Daniel to Vietnam to study and assess the French forces there.[224] Chief of Staff Matthew Ridgway dissuaded the President from intervening by presenting a comprehensive estimate of the massive military deployment that would be necessary. Eisenhower stated prophetically that "this war would absorb our troops by divisions."[225]
Eisenhower did provide France with bombers and non-combat personnel. After a few months with no success by the French, he added other aircraft to drop napalm for clearing purposes. Further requests for assistance from the French were agreed to but only on conditions Eisenhower knew were impossible to meet  allied participation and congressional approval.[226] When the French fortress of Dien Bien Phu fell to the Vietnamese Communists in May 1954, Eisenhower refused to intervene despite urgings from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the Vice President and the head of NCS.[227]
Eisenhower responded to the French defeat with the formation of the SEATO (Southeast Asia Treaty Organization) Alliance with the UK, France, New Zealand and Australia in defense of Vietnam against communism. At that time the French and Chinese reconvened the Geneva peace talks; Eisenhower agreed the US would participate only as an observer. After France and the Communists agreed to a partition of Vietnam, Eisenhower rejected the agreement, offering military and economic aid to southern Vietnam.[228] Ambrose argues that Eisenhower, by not participating in the Geneva agreement, had kept the U.S. out of Vietnam; nevertheless, with the formation of SEATO, he had, in the end, put the U.S. back into the conflict.[229]
In late 1954, Gen. J. Lawton Collins was made ambassador to "Free Vietnam" (the term South Vietnam came into use in 1955), effectively elevating the country to sovereign status. Collins' instructions were to support the leader Ngo Dinh Diem in subverting communism, by helping him to build an army and wage a military campaign.[230] In February 1955, Eisenhower dispatched the first American soldiers to Vietnam as military advisors to Diem's army. After Diem announced the formation of the Republic of Vietnam (RVN, commonly known as South Vietnam) in October, Eisenhower immediately recognized the new state and offered military, economic, and technical assistance.[231]
In the years that followed, Eisenhower increased the number of U.S. military advisors in South Vietnam to 900 men.[232] This was due to North Vietnam's support of "uprisings" in the south and concern the nation would fall.[228] In May 1957 Diem, then President of South Vietnam, made a state visit to the United States for ten days. President Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diem's honor in New York City. Although Diem was publicly praised, in private Secretary of State John Foster Dulles conceded that Diem had been selected because there were no better alternatives.[233]
After the election of November 1960, Eisenhower, in a briefing with John F. Kennedy, pointed out the communist threat in Southeast Asia as requiring prioritization in the next administration. Eisenhower told Kennedy he considered Laos "the cork in the bottle" with regard to the regional threat.[234]
Legitimation of Francoist Spain
Main article: Pact of Madrid
 Spanish dictator Francisco Franco and Eisenhower in Madrid in 1959.
The Pact of Madrid, signed on September 23, 1953, by Francoist Spain and the United States, was a significant effort to break international isolation of Spain after World War II, together with the Concordat of 1953. This development came at a time when other victorious Allies of World War II and much of the rest of the world remained hostile (for the 1946 United Nations condemnation[235] of the Francoist regime, see "Spanish Question") to a fascist regime sympathetic to the cause of the former Axis powers and established with Nazi assistance. This accord took the form of three separate executive agreements that pledged the United States to furnish economic and military aid to Spain. The United States, in turn, was to be permitted to construct and to utilize air and naval bases on Spanish territory (Naval Station Rota, Mor n Air Base, Torrej n Air Base and Zaragoza Air Base).
Eisenhower personally visited Spain in December 1959 to meet dictator Francisco Franco and consolidate his international legitimation.
The Middle East and Eisenhower doctrine
 Eisenhower with the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (1959)
Even before he was inaugurated Eisenhower accepted a request from the British government to restore the Shah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Pahlavi) to power. He therefore authorized the Central Intelligence Agency to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh.[236] This resulted in increased strategic control over Iranian oil by U.S. and British companies.[237]
In November 1956, Eisenhower forced an end to the combined British, French and Israeli invasion of Egypt in response to the Suez Crisis, receiving praise from Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser. Simultaneously he condemned the brutal Soviet invasion of Hungary in response to the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. He publicly disavowed his allies at the United Nations, and used financial and diplomatic pressure to make them withdraw from Egypt.[238] Eisenhower explicitly defended his strong position against Britain and France in his memoirs, which were published in 1965.[239]
After the Suez Crisis, the United States became the protector of unstable friendly governments in the Middle East via the "Eisenhower Doctrine".[240] Designed by Secretary of State Dulles, it held the U.S. would be "prepared to use armed force ... [to counter] aggression from any country controlled by international communism". Further, the United States would provide economic and military aid and, if necessary, use military force to stop the spread of communism in the Middle East.[241]
 Eisenhower and Vice President Richard Nixon with their host, King Saud of Saudi Arabia, at the Mayflower Hotel (1957)
Eisenhower applied the doctrine in 1957 1958 by dispensing economic aid to shore up the Kingdom of Jordan, and by encouraging Syria's neighbors to consider military operations against it. More dramatically, in July 1958, he sent 15,000 Marines and soldiers to Lebanon as part of Operation Blue Bat, a non-combat peace-keeping mission to stabilize the pro-Western government and to prevent a radical revolution from sweeping over that country.[242]
The mission proved a success and the Marines departed three months later. The deployment came in response to the urgent request of Lebanese president Camille Chamoun after sectarian violence had erupted in the country. Washington considered the military intervention successful since it brought about regional stability, weakened Soviet influence, and intimidated the Egyptian and Syrian governments, whose anti-West political position had hardened after the Suez Crisis.[242]
Most Arab countries were skeptical about the "Eisenhower doctrine" because they considered "Zionist imperialism" the real danger. However, they did take the opportunity to obtain free money and weapons. Egypt and Syria, supported by the Soviet Union, openly opposed the initiative. However, Egypt received American aid until the Six-Day War in 1967.[243]
As the Cold War deepened, Dulles sought to isolate the Soviet Union by building regional alliances of nations against it. Critics sometimes called it "pacto-mania".[244]
1960 U-2 incident
Main article: 1960 U-2 incident
 A U-2 reconnaissance aircraft in flight
On May 1, 1960, a U.S. one-man U-2 spy plane was shot down at high altitude over Soviet airspace. The flight was made to gain photo intelligence before the scheduled opening of an east west summit conference, which had been scheduled in Paris, 15 days later.[245] Captain Francis Gary Powers had bailed out of his aircraft and was captured after parachuting down onto Russian soil. Four days after Powers disappeared, the Eisenhower Administration had NASA issue a very detailed press release noting that an aircraft had "gone missing" north of Turkey. It speculated that the pilot might have fallen unconscious while the autopilot was still engaged, and falsely claimed that "the pilot reported over the emergency frequency that he was experiencing oxygen difficulties."[246]
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced that a "spy-plane" had been shot down but intentionally made no reference to the pilot. As a result, the Eisenhower Administration, thinking the pilot had died in the crash, authorized the release of a cover story claiming that the plane was a "weather research aircraft" which had unintentionally strayed into Soviet airspace after the pilot had radioed "difficulties with his oxygen equipment" while flying over Turkey.[247] The Soviets put Captain Powers on trial and displayed parts of the U-2, which had been recovered almost fully intact.[248]
The Four Power Paris Summit in May 1960 with Eisenhower, Nikita Khrushchev, Harold Macmillan and Charles de Gaulle collapsed because of the incident. Eisenhower refused to accede to Khrushchev's demands that he apologize. Therefore, Khrushchev would not take part in the summit. Up until this event, Eisenhower felt he had been making progress towards better relations with the Soviet Union. Nuclear arms reduction and Berlin were to have been discussed at the summit. Eisenhower stated it had all been ruined because of that "stupid U-2 business".[248]
The affair was an embarrassment for United States prestige. Further, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held a lengthy inquiry into the U-2 incident.[248] In Russia, Captain Powers made a forced confession and apology. On August 19, 1960, Powers was convicted of espionage and sentenced to imprisonment. On February 10, 1962, Powers was exchanged for Rudolf Abel in Berlin and returned to the U.S.[246]
Civil rights
While President Truman's 1948 Executive Order 9981 had begun the process of desegregating the Armed Forces, actual implementation had been slow. Eisenhower made clear his stance in his first State of the Union address in February 1953, saying "I propose to use whatever authority exists in the office of the President to end segregation in the District of Columbia, including the Federal Government, and any segregation in the Armed Forces".[249] When he encountered opposition from the services, he used government control of military spending to force the change through, stating "Wherever Federal Funds are expended ..., I do not see how any American can justify ... a discrimination in the expenditure of those funds".[250]
When Robert B. Anderson, Eisenhower's first Secretary of the Navy, argued that the U.S. Navy must recognize the "customs and usages prevailing in certain geographic areas of our country which the Navy had no part in creating," Eisenhower overruled him: "We have not taken and we shall not take a single backward step. There must be no second class citizens in this country."[251]
The administration declared racial discrimination a national security issue, as Communists around the world used the racial discrimination and history of violence in the U.S. as a point of propaganda attack.[252]
Eisenhower told District of Columbia officials to make Washington a model for the rest of the country in integrating black and white public school children.[253][254] He proposed to Congress the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and of 1960 and signed those acts into law. The 1957 act for the first time established a permanent civil rights office inside the Justice Department and a Civil Rights Commission to hear testimony about abuses of voting rights. Although both acts were much weaker than subsequent civil rights legislation, they constituted the first significant civil rights acts since 1875.[255]
In 1957 the state of Arkansas refused to honor a federal court order to integrate their public school system stemming from the Brown decision. Eisenhower demanded that Arkansas governor Orval Faubus obey the court order. When Faubus balked, the president placed the Arkansas National Guard under federal control and sent in the 101st Airborne Division. They escorted and protected nine black students' entry to Little Rock Central High School, an all-white public school, marking the first time since the Reconstruction Era the federal government had used federal troops in the South to enforce the U. S. Constitution.[256] Martin Luther King Jr. wrote to Eisenhower to thank him for his actions, writing "The overwhelming majority of southerners, Negro and white, stand firmly behind your resolute action to restore law and order in Little Rock".[257]
Eisenhower's administration contributed to the McCarthyist Lavender Scare[258] with President Eisenhower issuing Executive Order 10450 in 1953.[259] During Eisenhower's presidency thousands of lesbian and gay applicants were barred from federal employment and over 5,000 federal employees were fired under suspicions of being homosexual.[260][261] From 1947 to 1961 the number of firings based on sexual orientation were far greater than those for membership in the Communist Party,[260] and government officials intentionally campaigned to make "homosexual" synonymous with "Communist traitor" such that LGBT people were treated as a national security threat stemming from the belief they were susceptible to blackmail and exploitation.[262]
Relations with Congress
 Official White House Portrait of President Eisenhower, c. 1960
Eisenhower had a Republican Congress for only his first two years in office; in the Senate, Republicans held the majority by a one-vote margin. Despite being Eisenhower's political opponent for the 1952 Republican presidential nomination, Senator Majority Leader Robert A. Taft assisted Eisenhower a great deal by promoting the President's proposals among the "Old Guard" Republican Senators. Taft's death in July 1953 - six months into Eisenhower's presidency - affected Eisenhower both personally and professionally. The President noted he had lost "a dear friend" with Taft's passing. Eisenhower disliked Taft's successor as Majority Leader, Senator William Knowland, and the relationship between the two men led to tension between the Senate and the White House.[263]
This prevented Eisenhower from openly condemning Joseph McCarthy's highly criticized methods against communism. To facilitate relations with Congress, Eisenhower decided to ignore McCarthy's controversies and thereby deprive them of more energy from the involvement of the White House. This position drew criticism from a number of corners.[264] In late 1953, McCarthy declared on national television that the employment of communists within the government was a menace and would be a pivotal issue in the 1954 Senate elections. Eisenhower was urged to respond directly and specify the various measures he had taken to purge the government of communists.[265]
Among Eisenhower's objectives in not directly confronting McCarthy was to prevent McCarthy from dragging the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) into McCarthy's witch hunt for communists, which might interfere with the AEC's work on hydrogen bombs and other weapons programs.[266][267] In December 1953, Eisenhower learned that one of America's nuclear scientists, J. Robert Oppenheimer, had been accused of being a spy for the Soviet Union.[268]  Although Eisenhower never really believed that these allegations were true,[269] in January 1954 he ordered that "a blank wall" be placed between Oppenheimer and all defense-related activities.[270] The Oppenheimer security hearing was conducted later that year, resulting in the physicist losing his security clearance.[271] The matter was controversial at the time and remained so in later years, with Oppenheimer achieving a certain martyrdom.[267] The case would reflect poorly on Eisenhower as well, but the president had never examined it in any detail and had instead relied excessively upon the advice of his subordinates, especially that of AEC chairman Lewis Strauss.[272] Eisenhower later suffered a major political defeat when his nomination of Strauss to be Secretary of Commerce was defeated in the Senate in 1959, in part due to Strauss's role in the Oppenheimer matter.[273]
In May 1955, McCarthy threatened to issue subpoenas to White House personnel. Eisenhower was furious, and issued an order as follows: "It is essential to efficient and effective administration that employees of the Executive Branch be in a position to be completely candid in advising with each other on official matters ... it is not in the public interest that any of their conversations or communications, or any documents or reproductions, concerning such advice be disclosed." This was an unprecedented step by Eisenhower to protect communication beyond the confines of a cabinet meeting, and soon became a tradition known as executive privilege. Eisenhower's denial of McCarthy's access to his staff reduced McCarthy's hearings to rants about trivial matters and contributed to his ultimate downfall.[274]
In early 1954, the Old Guard put forward a constitutional amendment, called the Bricker Amendment, which would curtail international agreements by the Chief Executive, such as the Yalta Agreements. Eisenhower opposed the measure.[275] The Old Guard agreed with Eisenhower on the development and ownership of nuclear reactors by private enterprises, which the Democrats opposed. The President succeeded in getting legislation creating a system of licensure for nuclear plants by the AEC.[276]
The Democrats gained a majority in both houses in the 1954 election.[277] Eisenhower had to work with the Democratic Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson (later U.S. president) in the Senate and Speaker Sam Rayburn in the House, both from Texas. Joe Martin, the Republican Speaker from 1947 to 1949 and again from 1953 to 1955, wrote that Eisenhower "never surrounded himself with assistants who could solve political problems with professional skill. There were exceptions, Leonard W. Hall, for example, who as chairman of the Republican National Committee tried to open the administration's eyes to the political facts of life, with occasional success. However, these exceptions were not enough to right the balance."[278]
Speaker Martin concluded that Eisenhower worked too much through subordinates in dealing with Congress, with results, "often the reverse of what he has desired" because Members of Congress, "resent having some young fellow who was picked up by the White House without ever having been elected to office himself coming around and telling them 'The Chief wants this'. The administration never made use of many Republicans of consequence whose services in one form or another would have been available for the asking."[278]
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Main articles: Dwight D. Eisenhower Supreme Court candidates and Dwight D. Eisenhower judicial appointments
Eisenhower appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:
Earl Warren, 1953 (Chief Justice)
John Marshall Harlan II, 1954
William J. Brennan, 1956
Charles Evans Whittaker, 1957
Potter Stewart, 1958
Whittaker was unsuited for the role and soon retired (in 1962, after Eisenhower's presidency had ended). Stewart and Harlan were conservative Republicans, while Brennan was a Democrat who became a leading voice for liberalism.[279] In selecting a Chief Justice, Eisenhower looked for an experienced jurist who could appeal to liberals in the party as well as law-and-order conservatives, noting privately that Warren "represents the kind of political, economic, and social thinking that I believe we need on the Supreme Court ... He has a national name for integrity, uprightness, and courage that, again, I believe we need on the Court".[280] In the next few years Warren led the Court in a series of liberal decisions that revolutionized the role of the Court.
States admitted to the Union
Two states were admitted to the Union during Eisenhower's presidency.
Alaska  January 3, 1959 (49th state)
Hawaii  August 21, 1959 (50th state)
Health issues
Eisenhower began chain smoking cigarettes at West Point, often three or four packs a day. He joked that he "gave [himself] an order" to stop cold turkey in 1949. But Evan Thomas says the true story was more complex. At first, he removed cigarettes and ashtrays, but that did not work. He told a friend:
I decided to make a game of the whole business and try to achieve a feeling of some superiority ... So I stuffed cigarettes in every pocket, put them around my office on the desk ... [and] made it a practice to offer a cigarette to anyone who came in ... while mentally reminding myself as I sat down, "I do not have to do what that poor fellow is doing."[281]
He was the first president to release information about his health and medical records while in office, but people around him deliberately misled the public about his health. On September 24, 1955, while vacationing in Colorado, he had a serious heart attack.[282] Howard Snyder, his personal physician, misdiagnosed the symptoms as indigestion, and failed to call in help that was urgently needed. Snyder later falsified his own records to cover his blunder and to allow Eisenhower to imply that he was healthy enough to do his job.[283][284][285]
The heart attack required six weeks' hospitalization, during which time Nixon, Dulles, and Sherman Adams assumed administrative duties and provided communication with the president.[286] He was treated by Paul Dudley White, a cardiologist with a national reputation, who regularly informed the press of the president's progress. Instead of discounting him as a candidate for a second term as president, his physician recommended a second term as essential to his recovery.[287]
As a consequence of his heart attack Eisenhower developed a left ventricular aneurysm, which caused a mild stroke during a cabinet meeting on November 25, 1957, when Eisenhower suddenly found himself unable to move his right hand, or to speak as the stroke had caused aphasia. The president also suffered from Crohn's disease,[288] chronic inflammatory condition of the intestine,[289] which necessitated surgery for a bowel obstruction on June 9, 1956.[290] To treat the intestinal block, surgeons bypassed about ten inches of his small intestine.[291] His scheduled meeting with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was postponed so he could recover at his farm.[292] He was still recovering from this operation during the Suez Crisis. Eisenhower's health issues forced him to give up smoking and make some changes to his diet, but he still drank alcohol. During a visit to England he complained of dizziness and had to have his blood pressure checked on August 29, 1959; however, before dinner at prime ministerial manor house Chequers on the next day his doctor, General Howard Snyder, recalled that Eisenhower "drank several gin-and-tonics, and one or two gins on the rocks ... three or four wines with the dinner".[293]
Eisenhower's health during the last three years of his second term in office was relatively good. Eventually, after leaving the White House, he suffered several additional and ultimately crippling heart attacks.[294] A severe heart attack in August 1965 largely ended his participation in public affairs.[295] On December 12, 1966, his gallbladder was removed, containing 16 gallstones.[294] After Eisenhower's death in 1969 (see below), an autopsy revealed an undiagnosed adrenal pheochromocytoma,[296] a benign adrenalin-secreting tumor that may have made him more vulnerable to heart disease during his presidency. Eisenhower suffered seven heart attacks from 1955 until his death.[294]
End of presidency
The 22nd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which set a two-term limit on the presidency, was ratified in 1951. Eisenhower was the first president constitutionally prevented from serving a third term.
Eisenhower was also the first outgoing president to come under the protection of the Former Presidents Act; two living former presidents, Herbert Hoover and Harry S. Truman, had left office before the act was passed. Under the act, Eisenhower was entitled to a lifetime pension, state-provided staff and a Secret Service security detail.[297]
In the 1960 election to choose his successor, Eisenhower endorsed Nixon over Democrat John F. Kennedy. He told friends, "I will do almost anything to avoid turning my chair and country over to Kennedy."[140] He actively campaigned for Nixon in the final days, although he may have done Nixon some harm. When asked by reporters at the end of a televised press conference to list one of Nixon's policy ideas he had adopted, Eisenhower joked, "If you give me a week, I might think of one. I don't remember." Kennedy's campaign used the quote in one of its campaign commercials. Nixon narrowly lost to Kennedy. Eisenhower, who was, at 70, the oldest president in history to date, was succeeded by 43-year-old Kennedy, the youngest elected president.[140]
It was originally intended for President Eisenhower to have a more active role in the campaign as he wanted to respond to attacks Kennedy made on his administration. However, First Lady Mamie Eisenhower expressed concern to Second Lady Pat Nixon about the strain campaigning would put on his heart, and wanted the president to withdraw, without letting him know of her intervention. Vice President Nixon himself was informed by White House physician Major General Howard Snyder that he could not approve a heavy campaign schedule for the president, whose health problems had been exacerbated by Kennedy's attacks. Nixon then convinced Eisenhower not to go ahead with the expanded campaign schedule and limit himself to the original schedule. Nixon reflected that if Eisenhower had carried out his expanded campaign schedule he might have had a decisive impact on the outcome of the election, especially in states that Kennedy won with razor-thin margins. Mamie did not tell Dwight why Nixon changed his mind on Dwight's campaigning until years later.[298]
 Eisenhower's farewell address, January 17, 1961. Length 15:30.
On January 17, 1961, Eisenhower gave his final televised Address to the Nation from the Oval Office.[299] In his farewell speech, Eisenhower raised the issue of the Cold War and role of the U.S. armed forces. He described the Cold War: "We face a hostile ideology global in scope, atheistic in character, ruthless in purpose and insidious in method ..." and warned about what he saw as unjustified government spending proposals. He continued with a warning that "we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military industrial complex."[299]
Eisenhower elaborated, "we recognize the imperative need for this development ... the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist ... Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together."[299]
Because of legal issues related to holding a military rank while in a civilian office, Eisenhower had resigned his permanent commission as General of the Army before entering the Presidency. Upon completion of his presidential term, his commission was reactivated by Congress and Eisenhower again was commissioned a five-star general in the United States Army.[300][301]
Post-presidency (1961 1969)
 Eisenhower speaks to the press at the 1964 Republican National Convention
 President Lyndon Johnson with Eisenhower aboard Air Force One in October 1965
 Eisenhower with President Richard Nixon in February 1969
 Eisenhower's funeral service
 Graves of Dwight D. Eisenhower, Doud Dwight "Icky" Eisenhower and Mamie Eisenhower in Abilene, Kansas
Following the presidency, Eisenhower moved to the place where he and Mamie had spent much of their post-war time, a working farm adjacent to the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, 70 miles (110 km) from his ancestral home in Elizabethville, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.[302][303] They also maintained a retirement home in Palm Desert, California.[304] In 1967 the Eisenhowers donated the Gettysburg farm to the National Park Service.
After leaving office, Eisenhower did not completely retreat from political life. He flew to San Antonio, where he had been stationed years earlier, to support John W. Goode, the unsuccessful Republican candidate against the Democrat Henry B. Gonzalez for Texas's 20th congressional district seat.[305] He addressed the 1964 Republican National Convention, in San Francisco, and appeared with party nominee Barry Goldwater in a campaign commercial from his Gettysburg retreat.[306] That endorsement came somewhat reluctantly, because Goldwater had in the late 1950s criticized Eisenhower's administration as "a dime-store New Deal".[307] On January 20, 1969, the day Nixon was inaugurated as President, Eisenhower issued a statement praising his former vice president and calling it a "day for rejoicing".[308]
Death
On the morning of March 28, 1969, Eisenhower died in Washington, D.C., of congestive heart failure at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, at age 78. The following day, his body was moved to the Washington National Cathedral's Bethlehem Chapel, where he lay in repose for 28 hours.[309] He was then transported to the United States Capitol, where he lay in state in the Capitol Rotunda on March 30 and 31.[310] A state funeral service was conducted at the Washington National Cathedral on March 31.[311] The president and First Lady, Richard and Pat Nixon, attended, as did former president Lyndon Johnson. Also among the 2,000 invited guests were U.N. Secretary General U Thant and 191 foreign delegates from 78 countries, including 10 foreign heads of state and government. Notable guests included President Charles de Gaulle of France, who was in the United States for the first time since the state funeral of John F. Kennedy,[312] Chancellor Kurt-Georg Kiesinger of West Germany, King Baudouin of Belgium and Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran.[311]
The service included the singing of Faure's The Palms, and the playing of the hymn Onward, Christian Soldiers.[313]
That evening, Eisenhower's body was placed onto a special funeral train for its journey from the nation's capital through seven states to his hometown of Abilene, Kansas. First incorporated into President Abraham Lincoln's funeral in 1865, a funeral train would not be part of a U.S. state funeral again until 2018.[314] Eisenhower is buried inside the Place of Meditation, the chapel on the grounds of the Eisenhower Presidential Center in Abilene. As requested, he was buried in a Government Issue casket, wearing his World War II uniform, decorated with Army Distinguished Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters, Navy Distinguished Service Medal, and the Legion of Merit. Buried alongside Eisenhower are his son Doud, who died at age 3 in 1921, and wife Mamie, who died in 1979.[309]
President Richard Nixon eulogized Eisenhower in 1969, saying:
Some men are considered great because they lead great armies or they lead powerful nations. For eight years now, Dwight Eisenhower has neither commanded an army nor led a nation; and yet he remained through his final days the world's most admired and respected man, truly the first citizen of the world.[315]
Legacy and memory
Eisenhower's reputation declined in the immediate years after he left office. During his presidency, he was widely seen by critics as an inactive, uninspiring, golf-playing president. This was in stark contrast to his vigorous young successor, John F. Kennedy, who was 26 years his junior. Despite his unprecedented use of Army troops to enforce a federal desegregation order at Central High School in Little Rock, Eisenhower was criticized for his reluctance to support the civil rights movement to the degree that activists wanted. Eisenhower also attracted criticism for his handling of the 1960 U-2 incident and the associated international embarrassment,[316][317] for the Soviet Union's perceived leadership in the nuclear arms race and the Space Race, and for his failure to publicly oppose McCarthyism.[318] In particular, Eisenhower was criticized for failing to defend George C. Marshall from attacks by Joseph McCarthy, though he privately deplored McCarthy's tactics and claims.[319]
Following the access of Eisenhower's private papers, his reputation changed amongst presidential historians.[320][321][322] Historian John Lewis Gaddis has summarized a more recent turnaround in evaluations by historians:
Historians long ago abandoned the view that Eisenhower's was a failed presidency. He did, after all, end the Korean War without getting into any others. He stabilized, and did not escalate, the Soviet American rivalry. He strengthened European alliances while withdrawing support from European colonialism. He rescued the Republican Party from isolationism and McCarthyism. He maintained prosperity, balanced the budget, promoted technological innovation, facilitated (if reluctantly) the civil rights movement and warned, in the most memorable farewell address since Washington's, of a "military industrial complex" that could endanger the nation's liberties. Not until Reagan would another president leave office with so strong a sense of having accomplished what he set out to do.[323]
 Eisenhower signs the legislation that changes Armistice Day to Veterans Day, June 1, 1954
 President John F. Kennedy meets with General Eisenhower at Camp David, April 22, 1961, three days after the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion
Although conservatism in politics was strong during the 1950s, and Eisenhower generally espoused conservative sentiments, his administration concerned itself mostly with foreign affairs (an area in which the career-military president had more knowledge) and pursued a hands-off domestic policy. Eisenhower looked to moderation and cooperation as a means of governance, which he dubbed "The Middle Way".[324][325]
Although he sought to slow or contain the New Deal and other federal programs, he did not attempt to repeal them outright. In doing so, Eisenhower was popular among the liberal wing of the Republican Party.[324] Conservative critics of his administration thought that he did not do enough to advance the goals of the right; according to Hans Morgenthau, "Eisenhower's victories were but accidents without consequence in the history of the Republican party."[326]
Since the 19th century, many if not all presidents were assisted by a central figure or "gatekeeper", sometimes described as the president's private secretary, sometimes with no official title at all.[327] Eisenhower formalized this role, introducing the office of White House Chief of Staff  an idea he borrowed from the United States Army. Every president after Lyndon Johnson has also appointed staff to this position. Initially, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter tried to operate without a chief of staff, but each eventually appointed one.
As president, Eisenhower also initiated the "up or out" policy that still prevails in the U.S. military. Officers who are passed over for promotion twice, are then usually honorably but quickly discharged, in order to make way for younger, and more able officers. (As an army officer, Eisenhower had been stuck at the rank of major for 16 years in the interwar period.)
On December 20, 1944, Eisenhower was appointed to the rank of General of the Army, placing him in the company of George Marshall, Henry "Hap" Arnold, and Douglas MacArthur, the only four men to achieve the rank in World War II. Along with Omar Bradley, they were the only five men to achieve the rank since the August 5, 1888 death of Philip Sheridan, and the only five men to hold the rank of five-star general. The rank was created by an Act of Congress on a temporary basis, when Public Law 78-482 was passed on December 14, 1944,[328] as a temporary rank, subject to reversion to permanent rank six months after the end of the war. The temporary rank was then declared permanent on March 23, 1946, by Public Law 333 of the 79th Congress, which also awarded full pay and allowances in the grade to those on the retired list.[329][330] It was created to give the most senior American commanders parity of rank with their British counterparts holding the ranks of field marshal and admiral of the fleet. This second General of the Army rank is not the same as the post Civil War era version because of its purpose and five stars.
Frank Gasparro's obverse design (left) and reverse design (right) of the Presidential Medal of Appreciation award during Eisenhower's official visit to the State of Hawaii from June 20 to 25, 1960
Eisenhower founded People to People International in 1956, based on his belief that citizen interaction would promote cultural interaction and world peace. The program includes a student ambassador component, which sends American youth on educational trips to other countries.[331]
During his second term as president, Eisenhower distinctively preserved his presidential gratitude by awarding individuals a special memento. This memento was a series of specially designed U.S. Mint presidential appreciation medals. Eisenhower presented the medal as an expression of his appreciation and the medal is a keepsake reminder for the recipient.[332]
The development of the appreciation medals was initiated by the White House and executed by the United States Mint, through the Philadelphia Mint. The medals were struck from September 1958 through October 1960. A total of twenty designs are cataloged with a total mintage of 9,858. Each of the designs incorporates the text "with appreciation" or "with personal and official gratitude" accompanied with Eisenhower's initials "D.D.E." or facsimile signature. The design also incorporates location, date, and/or significant event. Prior to the end of his second term as president, 1,451 medals were turned in to the Bureau of the Mint and destroyed.[332] The Eisenhower appreciation medals are part of the Presidential Medal of Appreciation Award Medal Series.[332]
Tributes and memorials
Main article: List of memorials to Dwight D. Eisenhower
 Eisenhower Interstate System sign south of San Antonio, Texas
 Bronze statue of Eisenhower in the Capitol rotunda[333]
The Interstate Highway System is officially known as the "Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways" in his honor. It was inspired in part by Eisenhower's own Army experiences in World War II, where he recognized the advantages of the autobahn system in Germany.[169] Commemorative signs reading "Eisenhower Interstate System" and bearing Eisenhower's permanent 5-star rank insignia were introduced in 1993 and now are displayed throughout the Interstate System. Several highways are also named for him, including the Eisenhower Expressway (Interstate 290) near Chicago, the Eisenhower Tunnel on Interstate 70 west of Denver, and Interstate 80 in California.[334]
Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy is a senior war college of the Department of Defense's National Defense University in Washington, DC. Eisenhower graduated from this school when it was previously known as the Army Industrial College. The school's building on Fort Lesley J. McNair, when it was known as the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, was dedicated as Eisenhower Hall in 1960.
Eisenhower was honored on a US one dollar coin, minted from 1971 to 1978. His centenary was honored on a commemorative dollar coin issued in 1990.
In 1969 four major record companies  ABC Records, MGM Records, Buddha Records and Caedmon Audio  released tribute albums in Eisenhower's honor.[335]
In 1999, the United States Congress created the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission, to create an enduring national memorial in Washington, D.C. In 2009 the commission chose the architect Frank Gehry to design the memorial.[336][337] The groundbreaking ceremony of the memorial was held on November 3, 2017, and was dedicated on September 17, 2020.[338][339] It stands on a 4-acre (1.6 ha) site near the National Mall on Maryland Avenue, southwest across the street from the National Air and Space Museum.[340]
In December 1999 he was listed on Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th century. In 2009 he was named to the World Golf Hall of Fame in the Lifetime Achievement category for his contributions to the sport.[341] In 1973, he was inducted into the Hall of Great Westerners of the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum.[342] The Naming Commission has recommended that Fort Gordon be renamed Fort Eisenhower.[343]
Honors
Awards and decorations
 The star of the Soviet Order of Victory awarded to Eisenhower[344]
 The coat of arms granted to Eisenhower upon his incorporation as a knight of the Danish Order of the Elephant in 1950.[345] The anvil represents the fact that his name is derived from the German for "iron hewer", making these an example of canting arms.
U.S. military decorations[346]
Army Distinguished Service Medal w/ 4 oak leaf clusters
Navy Distinguished Service Medal
Legion of Merit
U.S. service medals[346]
Mexican Border Service Medal
World War I Victory Medal
American Defense Service Medal
European African Middle Eastern Campaign Medal w/ 7 campaign stars
World War II Victory Medal
Army of Occupation Medal w/ "Germany" clasp
National Defense Service Medal w/ 1 service star
International and foreign awards[347]
Order of the Liberator San Martin, Grand Cross (Argentina)
Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold with Sash (Austria)[348]
Order of Leopold, Grand Cordon (Belgium)   1945
Croix de guerre w/ palm (Belgium)
Order of the Southern Cross, Grand Cross (Brazil)
Order of Military Merit (Brazil), Grand Cross
Order of Aeronautical Merit, Grand Cross (Brazil)
War Medal (Brazil)
Campaign Medal (Brazil)
Order of Merit, Grand Cross (Chile)
Order of the Cloud and Banner, with Special Grand Cordon, (China)
Military Order of the White Lion, Grand Cross (Czechoslovakia)
War Cross 1939 1945 (Czechoslovakia)
Order of the Elephant, Knight (Denmark)   December 15, 1945
Order of Abdon Calder n, First Class (Ecuador)
Order of Ismail, Grand Cordon (Egypt)
Order of Solomon, Knight Grand Cross with Cordon (Ethiopia)
Order of the Queen of Sheba, Member (Ethiopia)
Legion of Honour, Grand Cross (France)   1943
Order of Liberation, Companion (France)
Military Medal (France)[349]
Croix de guerre w/ palm (France)
Royal Order of George I, Knight Grand Cross with Swords (Greece)
Order of the Redeemer, Knight Grand Cross (Greece)
Cross of Military Merit, First Class (Guatemala)
National Order of Honour and Merit, Grand Cross with Gold Badge (Haiti)
Order of the Holy Sepulchre, Knight Grand Cross (Holy See)
Military Order of Italy, Knight Grand Cross (Italy)
Order of the Chrysanthemum, Collar (Japan)
Order of the Oak Crown, Grand Cross (Luxembourg)
Military Medal (Luxembourg)
Order pro merito Melitensi, KGC (Sovereign Military Order of Malta)
Order of the Aztec Eagle, Collar (Mexico)   1945
Medal of Military Merit (Mexico)
Medal of Civic Merit (Mexico)
Order of Muhammad, (Morocco)
Order of Ouissam Alaouite, Grand Cross (Morocco)
Order of the Netherlands Lion, Knight Grand Cross (Netherlands)   October 6, 1945
Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav, Grand Cross (Norway)
Order of Nishan-e-Pakistan, First Class (Pakistan)   December 7, 1957
Order of Manuel Amador Guerrero, Grand Officer (Panama)
Orden Vasco N ez de Balboa, Grand Cross (Panama)
Order of Sikatuna, Grand Collar (Philippines)
Legion of Honor (Philippines), Chief Commander (Philippines)
Distinguished Service Star, (Philippines)
Order of Polonia Restituta, Grand Cross (Poland)
Order of Virtuti Militari, First Class (Poland)
Cross of Grunwald, First Class (Poland)
Order of the Royal House of Chakri, Knight (Thailand)
Order of Glory, Grand Cordon (Tunisia)
Order of the Bath, Knight Grand Cross (United Kingdom)
Military Division 1945
Civil Division 1957
Order of Merit (United Kingdom)
Member Military Division June 12, 1945
Africa Star, with 8th Army clasp (United Kingdom)
War Medal 1939 1945 (United Kingdom)
Order of Victory, Star (USSR)
Order of Suvorov, First Class (USSR)
The Royal Yugoslav Commemorative War Cross (Yugoslavia)
Freedom of the City
Eisenhower received the Freedom honor from several locations, including:
 Freedom of the City of London on June 12, 1945[350][351]
 Freedom of the City of Belfast on August 24, 1945[352]
 Freedom of the City of Edinburgh in 1946[353]
 Freedom of the Burgh of Maybole in October 1946[354]
This list is incomplete; you can help by adding missing items.  (August 2020)
Honorary degrees
Eisenhower received many honorary degrees from universities and colleges around the world. These included:
Location
Date
School
Degree
Gave Commencement Address
 Northern Ireland
August 24, 1945
Queen's University Belfast
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[352][355]
 England
1945
University of Oxford
Doctor of Civil Law (DCL)[356]
 Massachusetts
1946
Harvard University
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[357]
 Pennsylvania
1946
Gettysburg College
Doctorate[358]
 Ontario
1946
University of Toronto
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[359]
 Pennsylvania
1947
University of Pennsylvania
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[360]
 Connecticut
1948
Yale University
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[361]
 New York
1950
Hofstra University
Doctorate[362]
 New Hampshire
June 14, 1953
Dartmouth College
Doctorate
Yes[363]
 District of Columbia
November 19, 1953
Catholic University of America
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[364]
 Virginia
1953
College of William and Mary
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
 Illinois
1954
Northwestern University
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[365]
 Maryland
June 7, 1954
Washington College
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[366]
Yes
 Maryland
1958
Johns Hopkins University
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[367]
 India
December 17, 1959
University of Delhi
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[368]
 Indiana
June 5, 1960
University of Notre Dame
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[369]
 New York
June 20, 1964
Bard College
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[370]
 Iowa
1965
Grinnell College
Doctor of Laws (LL.D)[371]
 Ohio
October 5, 1965
Ohio University
Doctor of Humane Letters (DHL)[372]
Yes
This list is incomplete; you can help by adding missing items.  (August 2020)
Promotions
No insignia
Cadet, United States Military Academy: June 14, 1911
No pin insignia in 1915
Second Lieutenant, Regular Army: June 12, 1915
First Lieutenant, Regular Army: July 1, 1916
Captain, Regular Army: May 15, 1917
Major, National Army: June 17, 1918
Lieutenant Colonel, National Army: October 20, 1918
Captain, Regular Army: June 30, 1920(Reverted to permanent rank.)
Major, Regular Army: July 2, 1920
Captain, Regular Army: November 4, 1922(Discharged as major and appointed as captain due to reduction of Army.)
Major, Regular Army: August 26, 1924
Lieutenant Colonel, Regular Army: July 1, 1936
Colonel, Army of the United States: March 6, 1941
Brigadier General, Army of the United States: September 29, 1941
Major General, Army of the United States: March 27, 1942
Lieutenant General, Army of the United States: July 7, 1942
General, Army of the United States: February 11, 1943
Brigadier General, Regular Army: August 30, 1943
Major General, Regular Army: August 30, 1943
General of the Army, Army of the United States: December 20, 1944
General of the Army, Regular Army: April 11, 1946
Note: Eisenhower relinquished his active duty status when he became president on January 20, 1953. He was returned to active duty when he left office eight years later.
Family tree
David Jacob Eisenhower(1863 1942)Ida Stover(1862 1946)
Dwight D. Eisenhower(1890 1969)Mamie Doud(1896 1979)
Richard Nixon(1913 1994)Pat Ryan(1912 1993)Doud Eisenhower(1917 1921)John Eisenhower(1922 2013)Barbara Thompson(1926 2014)
Edward Cox(1946 present)Tricia Nixon(1946 present)Julie Nixon(1948 present)David Eisenhower(1948 present)FernandoEchavarr a-UribeAnne Eisenhower(1949 2022)Susan Eisenhower(1951 present)John MahonMary Eisenhower(1955 present)Ralph Atwater
Andrea Catsimatidis(1989 present)Christopher Cox(1979 present)Anthony Cheslock(1977 present)Jennie Eisenhower(1978 present)Alex Eisenhower(1980 present)Tara Brennan(1979 present)Melanie Eisenhower(1984 present)Adriana Echavarria(1969 present)Amelia Eisenhower Mahon(1981/82 present)Merrill Eisenhower Atwater(1981 present)
Chloe Cheslock(2013 present)Kaia Eisenhower(2007 present)Kaeden Eisenhower(2013 present)
See also
"And I don't care what it is", phrase by Eisenhower, 1952, on religion
Atoms for Peace, a speech to the UN General Assembly in December 1953
Committee on Scientists and Engineers
Eisenhower baseball controversy
Eisenhower dollar
Eisenhower method for time management
Eisenhower National Historic Site
Eisenhower on U.S. Postage stamps
Eisenhower Presidential Center
Ike: Countdown to D-Day  a 2004 American television film about the decisions Eisenhower made as Supreme Commander that led to the successful D-Day invasion of World War II
Pact of Madrid
People to People Student Ambassador Program
Pressure  a 2014 British play on Eisenhower's part in the meteorological decisions leading up to D-Day; he was played in the premiere production by Malcolm Sinclair
Kay Summersby
General:
Historical rankings of presidents of the United States
History of the United States (1945 1964)
List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
References
^ "The Eisenhowers". www.eisenhowerlibrary.gov. Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021.
^ "The Eisenhower Presidential Library and Museum Homepage". Eisenhower.utexas.edu. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2012.
^ a b c d e f Barnett, Lincoln (November 9, 1942). "General "Ike" Eisenhower". Life. p. 112. Retrieved May 31, 2011.
^ Korda, Michael (2007). "Ike: An American Hero". p. 63. ISBN 9780061744969. Retrieved July 22, 2012.
^ a b Ambrose 1983, p. 14
^ a b Ambrose 1983, pp. 16 18
^ "Ancestors of Dwight David Eisenhower" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 25, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2020.
^ "Eisenhower Ancestry".
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 19
^ D'Este, Carlo (2003). Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life. New York: Macmillan. pp. 21 22. ISBN 0805056874. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2016.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 18
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 22
^ D'Este, Carlo (2003). Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life. New York: Macmillan. p. 31. ISBN 0805056874. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved June 12, 2020.
^ a b Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1967). At Ease: Stories I Tell to Friends, Garden City, New York, Doubleday & Company, Inc.
^ D'Este, Carlo (2002). Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life, p. 25.
^ "Getting on the Right TRRACC" (PDF). Lesson Plans: The Molding of a Leader. Eisenhower National Historic Site. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 26, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2013. ... Ike spent his weekends at Davis's camp on the Smoky Hill River.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 32
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 25
^ Bergman, Jerry. "Steeped in Religion: President Eisenhower and the Influence of the Jehovah's Witnesses", Kansas History (Autumn 1998).
^ D'Este, Carlo (2002). Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life, p. 58.
^ online "Faith Staked Down" Archived August 20, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Time, February 9, 1953.
^ "Public School Products". Time. September 14, 1959.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 36
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 37
^ "Eisenhower: Soldier of Peace". Time. April 4, 1969. Archived from the original on May 24, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ a b "Biography: Dwight David Eisenhower". Eisenhower Foundation. Archived from the original on May 23, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 44 48
^ "President Dwight D. Eisenhower Baseball Related Quotations". Baseball Almanac. Archived from the original on May 21, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ "Eisenhower BOQ 1915". Fort Sam Houston. Archived from the original on July 17, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2012.
^ "Lt Eisenhower and Football Team". Fort Sam Houston. Archived from the original on July 17, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2012.
^ Botelho, Greg (July 15, 1912). "Roller-coaster life of Indian icon, sports' first star". CNN. Archived from the original on November 14, 2007. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ "Ike and the Team". Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ a b O'Connell, Robert L. (2022). Team America (1st ed.). HarperCollins. pp. 117 119. ISBN 9780062883322.
^ "Dwight David Eisenhower". Internet Public Library. Archived from the original on May 11, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 56
^ "We Remember". Sigma Beta Chi. Archived from the original on March 20, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018.
^ Weingroff, Richard F. (March April 2003). "The Man Who Changed America, Part I". fhwa.dot.gov. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2013.
^ O'Connell, Robert L. (2022). Team America (1st ed.). HarperCollins. p. 122. ISBN 9780062883322.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 59 60
^ Berger-Knorr, Lawrence. The Pennsylvania Relations of Dwight D. Eisenhower. p. 8.
^ a b c Beckett, Wendy. "President Eisenhower: Painter" (PDF). White House History (21): 30 40. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 5, 2012.
^ Weil, Martin; Langer, Emily (December 21, 2013). "John S.D. Eisenhower dies; historian and president's son was 91". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 17, 2017. Retrieved August 16, 2017.
^ "Camp David". eisenhower.archives.gov. Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, and Boyhood Home. Archived from the original on July 6, 2017. Retrieved August 16, 2017. Ike re-named it 'Camp David' in honor of his grandson David Eisenhower
^ Owen 1999, pp. 165 167
^ Owen 1999, p. 169
^ Owen 1999, pp. 172 173
^ Dodson, Marcida (November 17, 1990). "New Exhibit Offers a Look at Eisenhower the Artist". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2012.
^ Erickson, Hal (2013). "Angels in the Outfield (1951): Review Summary". Movies & TV Dept. The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved September 25, 2013.
^ Schaeper, Thomas J. (2010). Rhodes Scholars, Oxford, and the Creation of an American Elite. Oxford, NY: Berghahn Books. p. 210. ISBN 978-1845457211.
^ Smith, Jean Edward (2012). Eisenhower in War and Peace. Random House. pp. 31 32, 38. ISBN 978-0679644293.
^ "Manuel L. Quezon: 15 Mesmerizing Facts About Philippines' 2nd President". FilipiKnow. June 3, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2020.
^ Walker, Karen (June 2009). "D-Day Memories of the Bridge Player in Chief". ACBL District 8. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2016.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 61 62
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 62
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 63
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 65
^ "Dwight David Eisenhower". MilitaryTimes.com. Sightline Media Group. Retrieved January 30, 2021.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 68
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 69
^ Sixsmith, E. K. G. (1973). Eisenhower, His Life and Campaigns. Conshohocken, PA Combined Publishing. p. 6.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 70 73
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 73 76
^ Bender, Mark C. (1990). "Watershed at Leavenworth". U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. Archived from the original on October 29, 2008. Retrieved September 6, 2008.
^ American President: An Online Reference Resource, Dwight David Eisenhower (1890 1969), "Life Before the Presidency," Archived June 5, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia.
^ Trout, Steven (2010). On the Battlefield of Memory: The First World War and American Remembrance, 1919 1941. pp. xv xxxii.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 82
^ "General of the Army Dwight David Eisenhower". Army Historical Foundation. January 22, 2015. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 16, 2016.
^ "Dwight David Eisenhower, The Cenntennial". U.S. Army Center of Military History. 1990. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved March 16, 2016.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 88
^ Wukovits, John F. (2006). Eisenhower. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-230-61394-2. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2011.
^ D'Este, Carlo (2002). Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life. New York: Henry Holt & Co. p. 223. ISBN 0-8050-5687-4. Retrieved June 15, 2011.
^ Irish, Kerry. "Dwight Eisenhower and Douglas MacArthur in the Philippines: There Must Be a Day of Reckoning", Journal of Military History, April 2010, Vol. 74, Issue 2, pp. 439 473.
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 94
^ "Dwight D. Eisenhower Pre-Presidential Papers, 1916 52" (PDF). Eisenhower Presidential Library. 1997. p. 74. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 9, 2017. Retrieved August 16, 2017. references to Eisenhower's pilot's license
^ Komons, Nick (August 1989). "unknown title". Air Progress: 62.
^ Merrit, J sus V. (1962). Our presidents: profiles in history. Philippines. p. 77.
^ Korda (2007), pp 239 243
^ "The Eisenhowers: The General". Dwightdeisenhower.com. Archived from the original on December 30, 2010. Retrieved May 3, 2010.
^ Ambrose 1983
^ "Major General James E. Chaney". U.S. Air Force. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved August 16, 2017. From January 1942 to June 1942, he was the commanding general, U.S. Army Forces in the British Isles.
^ Eisenhower lived in 'Telegraph Cottage', Warren Road, Coombe, Kingston upon Thames from 1942 to 1944. In 1995, a plaque commemorating this was placed there by the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames. It can be seen at the north end of Warren Road.
^ Huston, John W. (2002).  Maj. Gen. John W. Huston, USAF (ed.). American Airpower Comes of Age: General Henry H. "Hap" Arnold's World War II Diaries. Air University Press. pp. 288, 312. ISBN 1585660930.
^ Gallagher, Wes (December 1942). "Eisenhower Commanded Gibraltar". The Lewiston Daily Sun. Archived from the original on September 20, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2013.
^ Atkinson, An Army at Dawn, pp. 251 252.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 204 210
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 230 233
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 254 255
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 275 276
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 280 281
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 284
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 286 288
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 289
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 250, 298
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 278
^ William Safire, Lend me your ears: great speeches in history (2004), p. 1143
^ Grant 2001.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 340 354
^ Jean Edward Smith, Eisenhower in War and Peace (2012) p. 451.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 375 380
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 395 406
^ Hobbs 1999, p. 223
^ Zink, Harold (1947). American Military Government in Germany, pp. 39 86
^ Goedde, Petra. "From Villains to Victims: Fraternization and the Feminization of Germany, 1945 1947", Diplomatic History, Winter 1999, Vol. 23, Issue 1, pp. 1 19
^ Tent, James F. (1982), Mission on the Rhine: Reeducation and Denazification in American-Occupied Germany
^ Zink, Harold (1957). The United States in Germany, 1944 1955
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 421 425
^ Goedde, Petra (2002). GIs and Germans: Culture, Gender and Foreign Relations, 1945 1949
^ Richard Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, with Rhodes citing a 1963 profile called "Ike on Ike, in Newsweek November 11, 1963
^ a b Ambrose 1983, pp. 432 452
^ "Dwight Eisenhower in Poland". Polish Radio. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016.
^ a b Pusey, Merlo J. (1956). Eisenhower, the President. Macmillan. pp. 1 6. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2013.
^ "Truman Wrote of '48 Offer to Eisenhower Archived June 3, 2017, at the Wayback Machine" The New York Times, July 11, 2003.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 455 460
^ "  U.S. Presidents" (PDF). Phi Beta Kappa. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved August 16, 2017.
^ Ambrose 1983, ch. 24
^ Crusade in Europe, Doubleday; 1st edition (1948), 559 pages, ISBN 1125300914
^ a b Owen 1999, pp. 171 172
^ Pietrusza, David, 1948: Harry Truman's Victory and the Year That Transformed America, Union Square Publishing, 2011, p. 201
^ a b Jacobs 1993, p. 20
^ Cook 1981, ch. 3
^ Cook 1981, p. 79
^ a b Jacobs 1993, p. 18
^ Jacobs 2001, pp. 140 141
^ Jacobs 2001, pp. 145 146
^ Jacobs 2001, pp. 162 164
^ Jacobs 2001, pp. 168 169, 175
^ Jacobs 2001, pp. 152, 238 242, 245 249
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 479 483
^ a b Young & Schilling 2019, p. ix
^ a b Jacobs 2001, pp. 235 236
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 484 485
^ Jacobs 1993, pp. 17ff
^ Jacobs 2001, pp. 251 254
^ Jacobs 2001, p. 279
^ Jacobs 2001, p. 299
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 502 511
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 512
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 524 528
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 530
^ a b c d Gibbs, Nancy (November 10, 2008). "When New President Meets Old, It's Not Always Pretty". Time. Archived from the original on November 11, 2008. Retrieved November 12, 2008.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 541 546
^ Herbert H. Hyman, and Paul B. Sheatsley, "The political appeal of President Eisenhower." Public Opinion Quarterly 17.4 (1953): 443-460 online.
^ Ambrose 1983, pp. 556 567
^ Ambrose 1983, p. 571
^ Frum 2000, p. 7
^ Crockett, Zachary (January 23, 2017). "Donald Trump is the only US president ever with no political or military experience". vox.com. Archived from the original on January 6, 2017. Retrieved January 8, 2019.
^ Campbell, Angus; Converse, Philip L.; Miller, Warren E.; Stokes, Donald E. (1960). The American Voter. p. 56. ISBN 978-0226092546.
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 14
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 24
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 20 25
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 32
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 43
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 52
^ Black, Allida; Hopkins, June;  et al., eds. (2003). "Teaching Eleanor Roosevelt: Dwight Eisenhower". Eleanor Roosevelt National Historic Site. Archived from the original on January 5, 2007. Retrieved November 26, 2011.
^ Eisenhower, David; Julie Nixon Eisenhower (October 11, 2011). Going Home To Glory: A Memoir of Life with Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1961 1969. Simon and Schuster. p. 126. ISBN 978-1439190913.
^ Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1959). Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower. Best Books on. p. 270. ISBN 978-1623768300.
^ Miller, James A. (November 21, 2007), "An inside look at Eisenhower's civil rights record", The Boston Globe, archived from the original on January 7, 2012
^ Mayer, Michael S. (2009). The Eisenhower Years. p. xii. ISBN 978-0-8160-5387-2.
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 220
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 285 288
^ Jean Edward Smith (2012). Eisenhower in War and Peace. Random House. pp. 674 683. ISBN 978-0679644293. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 321 325
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 297
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 25
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 537
^ "The cracks are showing". The Economist. June 26, 2008. Archived from the original on November 20, 2007. Retrieved October 23, 2008.
^ "The Last Week  The Road to War". USS Washington (BB-56). Archived from the original on March 23, 2007. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ "About the Author". USS Washington (BB-56). Archived from the original on May 13, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ a b "Interstate Highway System". Eisenhower Presidential Center. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2012.
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 301, 326
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 66
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 94
^ Eisenhower, Susan, "50 years later, we're still ignoring Ike's warning" Archived May 4, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The Washington Post, January 16, 2011, p. B3.
^ American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1950 1955, Volume 1 page 63
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 132 134, 147
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 144
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 247
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 265
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 180, 236 237
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 211
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 207
^ Prevots, Naima (January 1, 2012). Dance for Export: Cultural Diplomacy and the Cold War. Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 9780819573360   via Google Books.
^ Pach, Chester J. (April 10, 2017). A Companion to Dwight D. Eisenhower. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780470655214   via Google Books.
^ Krenn, Michael L. (November 2, 2017). The History of United States Cultural Diplomacy: 1770 to the Present Day. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781472508782   via Google Books.
^ Kenner, James I. (August 1958).  Weible, Lt. General Walter L. (ed.). "Seventh Army Symphony Orchestra: Musical Ambassadors, Soldiers Too". Army. Vol. 9, no. 1. Association of the United States Army. pp. 60 62   via books.google.com.
^ "7ASO Article   Unknown newspaper". www.7aso.org. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved May 12, 2019.
^ Canarina, John (1998). Uncle Sam's Orchestra: Memories of the Seventh Army Symphony. ISBN 9781580460194.
^ Beal, Amy C. (July 4, 2006). New Music, New Allies: American Experimental Music in West Germany from the Zero Hour to Reunification. p. 49. ISBN 9780520247550.
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 111
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 112 113, 194
^ Nwaubani, Ebere (October 2001). "Eisenhower, Nkrumah and the Congo Crisis". Journal of Contemporary History. Sage Publications, Inc. 36 (4): 611. doi:10.1177/002200940103600403. JSTOR 3180775. S2CID 159492904. A US Senate report issued in 1975 held that 'The chain of events and testimony is strong enough to permit a reasonable inference that the plot to assassinate Lumumba was authorized by President Eisenhower.'
^ Thompkins, Gwen (May 10, 2008). "Years After His Murder, Congo Leader Stirs Emotion". NPR. CIA records show President Dwight D. Eisenhower believed Lumumba was a Soviet sympathizer and authorized a failed CIA operation to kill him.
^ Kettle, Martin (August 10, 2000). "President 'ordered murder' of Congo leader". The Guardian. London.
^ "The C.I.A. and Lumumba". The New York Times Magazine. August 2, 1981.
^ "A killing in Congo". US News. July 24, 2000. Retrieved June 18, 2006.
^ Lardner, George (August 8, 2000). "Did Ike Authorize a Murder?". The Washington Post. The CIA acted as though the president had given the go-ahead, sending one of its scientists to the Congo in September 1960 with a vial of deadly poison that could be injected into something Lumumba might eat. ... The poison, however, was never used, and CIA operatives were unable to get to Lumumba before he was eventually captured by Congolese rivals and killed ....
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 228
^ Piccone, Ted; Miller, Ashley (December 19, 2016). Cuba, the U.S., and the concept of sovereignty: Toward a common vocabulary? (Report). Washington: Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. President Dwight D. Eisenhower approved a plan to train Cuban exiles to commit violent acts of terrorism within Cuba against civilians, and the CIA trained and commanded pilots to bomb civilian airfields...U.S. government officials justified some of the terrorist attacks on Cuban soil on the grounds of coercive regime change
^ Yaffe, Helen (2020). We are Cuba!: How a Revolutionary People have Survived in a Post-Soviet World. New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 67, 176 181. ISBN 978-0300230031. What have Cuba's revolutionary people survived? For six decades, the Caribbean island has withstood manifold and unrelenting aggression from the world's dominant economic and political power: overt and covert military actions; sabotage and terrorism by US authorities and allied exiles ...The CIA recruited operatives inside Cuba to carry out terrorism and sabotage, killing civilians and causing economic damage.
^ Dom nguez L pez, Ernesto; Yaffe, Helen (November 2, 2017). "The deep, historical roots of Cuban anti-imperialism" (PDF). Third World Quarterly. Abingdon: Taylor & Francis. 38 (11): 2517 2535. doi:10.1080/01436597.2017.1374171. S2CID 149249232. In international terms, Cuba's Revolution dented the US sphere of influence, weakening the US position as a global power. These were the structural geopolitical motivations for opposing Cuba's hard-won independence. The Bay of Pigs (Playa Giron) invasion and multiple military invasion plans, programmes of terrorism, sabotage and subversion were part of Washington's reaction.
^ Alzugaray, Carlos; Quainton, Anthony (July December 2011). "Cuban-U.S. Relations: The Terrorism Dimension" (PDF). Pensamiento Propio. Buenos Aires: Coordinadora Regional de Investigaciones Econ micas y Sociales. 16 (34): 71 84. ISSN 1016-9628. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 10, 2018. It is now evident from publicly available documents that several U.S. plans to overthrow the Cuban government included the use of terrorist tactics. The March 1960 project that President Dwight D. Eisenhower approved ...involved the training of Cuban exiles to commit violent acts inside Cuban territory against civilian targets. Prior to the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA trained and commanded pilots who bombed civilian airfields and areas inhabited by peaceful citizens, causing numerous deaths. Terrorists who were supported and/or directed by the U.S. government carried out similar attacks as part of Operation Mongoose in 1962
^ Franklin, Jane (2016). Cuba and the U.S. empire : a chronological history. New York: New York University Press. pp. 45 63, 388 392, et passim. ISBN 9781583676059. Retrieved February 2, 2020.
^ Bolender, Keith (2012). Cuba under siege : American policy, the revolution, and its people. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. x, 14, 18 20, 53 57, 63 64, et passim. doi:10.1057/9781137275554. ISBN 978-1-137-27554-7. A major component became the development of a more traditional military response, President Eisenhower approving the CIA document drafted by J.C. King, officer in charge of Latin America in the Western Hemisphere Division. The proposal was one part of the all-encompassing strategy being laid under the April 1960 State Department punishment guidelines...The development of a siege mentality was accelerated from early 1960...with the introduction of one of the most violent aspects of American policy   terrorism ...the acts included bombings of sugarcane fields, sabotage against commercial and industrial sites, as well as the strafing of Havana residential targets. One such raid in October 1959 resulted in the death of several civilians, followed by other light aircraft dropping incendiary bombs
^ [198][199][200][201][202][203]
^ Greenberg, David (January 14, 2011) "Beware the military industrial Complex", Slate
^ John M. Logsdon, "Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program" (NASA; 1995)
^ Logsdon, John M., and Lear, Linda J. Exploring the Unknown:Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program/ Washington D.C.
^ W. D. Kay, Defining NASA The Historical Debate Over the Agency's Mission, 2005.
^ Parmet, Herbert S. Eisenhower and the American Crusades (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1972)
^ Yankek Mieczkowski, Eisenhower's Sputnik Moment: The Race for Space and World Prestige (Cornell University Press; 2013)
^ Peter J. Roman, Eisenhower and the Missile Gap (1996)
^ The Presidents's Science Advisory Committee, "Report of the Ad Hoc Panel on Man-in-Space" December 16, 1960. NASA Historical Collection
^ Greg Ward, "A Rough Guide History of the USA" (Penguin Group: London, 2003)
^ Jackson, Michael Gordon (2005). "Beyond Brinkmanship: Eisenhower, Nuclear War Fighting, and Korea, 1953 1968". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 35 (1): 52 75. doi:10.1111/j.1741-5705.2004.00235.x. ISSN 0360-4918. JSTOR 27552659.
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 51
^ Jones, Matthew (2008). "Targeting China: U.S. Nuclear Planning and 'Massive Retaliation' in East Asia, 1953 1955". Journal of Cold War Studies. 10 (4): 37 65. doi:10.1162/jcws.2008.10.4.37. S2CID 57564482.
^ a b Ambrose 1984, pp. 106 107
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 173
^ Zhai, Qiang (2000). "Crisis and Confrontations: Chinese-American Relations during the Eisenhower Administration". Journal of American-East Asian Relations. 9 (3/4): 221 249. doi:10.1163/187656100793645921.
^ a b Ambrose 1984, p. 231
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 245, 246
^ Accinelli, Robert (1990). "Eisenhower, Congress, and the 1954 55 offshore island crisis". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 20 (2): 329 348. JSTOR 27550618.
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 229
^ Dunnigan, James and Nofi, Albert (1999), Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War. St. Martins Press, p. 85.
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 175
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 175 157
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 185
^ a b Dunnigan, James and Nofi, Albert (1999), Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War, p. 257
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 204 209
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 215
^ Anderson, David L. (1991). Trapped by Success: The Eisenhower Administration and Vietnam, 1953 1961. Columbia U.P. ISBN 978-0231515337. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ "Vietnam War". Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016.
^ Karnow, Stanley. (1991), Vietnam, A History, p. 230.
^ Reeves, Richard (1993), President Kennedy: Profile of Power, p. 75.
^ "Resolution 39 (I) of the UN General Assembly on the Spanish question".
^ Eisenhower gave verbal approval to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and to Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles to proceed with the coup; Ambrose, Eisenhower, Vol. 2: The President p. 111; Ambrose (1990), Eisenhower: Soldier and President, New York: Simon and Schuster, p. 333.
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 129
^ Kingseed, Cole (1995), Eisenhower and the Suez Crisis of 1956, ch. 6
^ Dwight D. Eisenhower, Waging Peace: 1956 1961 (1965) p. 99
^ Lahav, Pnina. "The Suez Crisis of 1956 and Its Aftermath: A Comparative Study of Constitutions, Use of Force, Diplomacy and International Relations". Boston University Law Review. 95.
^ Isaac Alteras, Eisenhower and Israel: U.S. Israeli Relations, 1953 1960 (1993), p. 296.
^ a b Little, Douglas (1996). "His finest hour? Eisenhower, Lebanon, and the 1958 Middle East Crisis". Diplomatic History. 20 (1): 27 54. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7709.1996.tb00251.x.
^ Hahn, Peter L. (2006). "Securing the Middle East: The Eisenhower Doctrine of 1957". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 36 (1): 38 47. doi:10.1111/j.1741-5705.2006.00285.x.
^ Navari, Cornelia (2000). Internationalism and the State in the Twentieth Century. Routledge. p. 316. ISBN 978-0415097475.
^ Pocock, Chris (2000). The U-2 Spyplane; Toward the Unknown. Schiffer Military History. ISBN 978-0764311130.
^ a b Orlov, Alexander. "The U-2 Program: A Russian Officer Remembers". Archived from the original on July 13, 2006. Retrieved April 29, 2013.
^ Fontaine, Andr  (1968). History of the Cold War: From the Korean War to the present. History of the Cold War. Vol. 2. R. Bruce (translator). Pantheon Books. p. 338.
^ a b c Bogle, Lori Lynn, ed. (2001), The Cold War, Routledge, p. 104. 978-0815337218
^ State of the Union Address, February 2, 1953, Public Papers, 1953 pp. 30 31.
^ "Eisenhower Press Conference, March 19, 1953". The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012.
^ Byrnes to DDE, August 27, 1953, Eisenhower Library"
^ Dudziak, Mary L. (2002), Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy
^ Eisenhower 1963, p. 230
^ Parmet 1972, pp. 438 439
^ Mayer, Michael S. (1989). "The Eisenhower Administration and the Civil Rights Act of 1957". Congress & the Presidency. 16 (2): 137 154. doi:10.1080/07343468909507929.
^ Nichol, David (2007). A Matter of Justice: Eisenhower and the Beginning of the Civil Rights Revolution. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1416541509.
^ to DDE, September 25, 1957, Eisenhower Library
^ "An interview with David K. Johnson author of The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government". press.uchicago.edu. The University of Chicago. 2004. Archived from the original on December 20, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2017.
^ Adkins, Judith (August 15, 2016). "'These People Are Frightened to Death' Congressional Investigations and the Lavender Scare". archives.gov. The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Most significantly, the 1950 congressional investigations and the Hoey committee's final report helped institutionalize discrimination by laying the groundwork for President Dwight D. Eisenhower's 1953 Executive Order #10450, 'Security Requirements for Government Employment.' That order explicitly added sexuality to the criteria used to determine suitability for federal employment.
^ a b Sears, Brad; Hunter, Nan D.; Mallory, Christy (September 2009). Documenting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in State Employment (PDF). Los Angeles: The Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy at the University of California Los Angeles School of Law. pp. 5 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 6, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018. From 1947 to 1961, more than 5,000 allegedly homosexual federal civil servants lost their jobs in the purges for no reason other than sexual orientation, and thousands of applicants were also rejected for federal employment for the same reason. During this period, more than 1,000 men and women were fired for suspected homosexuality from the State Department alone a far greater number than were dismissed for their membership in the Communist party.
^ Adkins, Judith (August 15, 2016). "'These People Are Frightened to Death' Congressional Investigations and the Lavender Scare". archives.gov. The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Historians estimate that somewhere between 5,000 and tens of thousands of gay workers lost their jobs during the Lavender Scare.
^ Sears, Brad; Hunter, Nan D.; Mallory, Christy (September 2009). Documenting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in State Employment (PDF). Los Angeles: The Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy at the University of California Los Angeles School of Law. pp. 5 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 6, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Johnson has demonstrated that during this era government officials intentionally engaged in campaigns to associate homosexuality with Communism: 'homosexual' and 'pervert' became synonyms for 'Communist' and 'traitor.'
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 118 119
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 56 62
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 140
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 167
^ a b Young & Schilling 2019, p. 132
^ Bundy 1988, pp. 305 306
^ Bundy 1988, p. 305
^ Young & Schilling 2019, p. 128
^ Bundy 1988, pp. 310 311
^ Bundy 1988, pp. 316 317
^ Young & Schilling 2019, pp. 147, 150
^ Ambrose 1984, pp. 188 189
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 154
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 157
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 219
^ a b Joseph W. Martin as told to Donavan, Robert J. (1960), My First Fifty Years in Politics, New York: McGraw Hill, p. 227
^ Newton, Eisenhower (2011) pp. 356 357
^ "Personal and confidential To Milton Stover Eisenhower, 9 October 1953. In The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower, ed. L. Galambos and D. van Ee, (1996) doc. 460". Eisenhowermemorial.org. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved January 26, 2012.
^ Thomas, Evan (2012). Ike's Bluff: President Eisenhower's Secret Battle to Save the World. Little, Brown. p. 175. ISBN 978-0316217279. Retrieved April 28, 2017.
^ Newton, Eisenhower pp. 196 199.
^ Clarence G. Lasby, Eisenhower's Heart Attack: How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency (1997) pp. 57 113.
^ Robert P. Hudson, "Eisenhower's Heart Attack: How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency (review)" Bulletin of the History of Medicine 72#1 (1998) pp. 161 162 online Archived April 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine.
^ R.H. Ferrell, Ill-Advised: Presidential Health & Public Trust (1992), pp. 53 150
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 272
^ Ambrose 1984, p. 281
^ Johnston, Richard J. H. (June 13, 1956). "Butler Criticizes Illness Reports: Says News Has Been Handled in Terms of Propaganda Hagerty Denies It". The New York Times. p. 32A. Retrieved December 22, 2016. Paul M. Butler, the Democratic National Chairman, ... declared that the physicians who operated on and attended the President in his most recent illness 'have done a terrific job of trying to convince the American people that a man who has had a heart attack and then was afflicted with Crohn's disease is a better man physically.' He added: 'Whether the American people will buy that, I don't know.'
^ Clark, Robert E (June 9, 1956). "President's Heart Reported Sound; Surgery Is Indicated: Inflamed, Obstructed, Intestine Is Blamed". Atlanta Daily World. p. 1. Retrieved December 22, 2016.
^ Leviero, Anthony (June 9, 1956). "President Undergoes Surgery on Intestine Block at 2:59 A.M.: Doctors Pronounce It Success : Condition Is Good: Operation Lasts Hour and 53 Minutes 13 Attend Him". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved December 22, 2016. President Eisenhower was operated on at 2:59 A.M. today for relief of an intestinal obstruction. At 4:55 A.M., the operation was pronounced a success by the surgeons. ... The President's condition was diagnosed as ileitis. This is an inflamation of the ileum the lowest portion of the small intestine, where it joins the large intestine. ... The President first felt ill shortly after midnight yesterday. He had attended a dinner of the White House News Photographers Association Thursday night and had returned to the White House at 11. Mrs. Eisenhower called Maj. Gen. Howard McC. Snyder, the President's personal physician, at 12:45 A.M. yesterday, telling him the President had some discomfort in his stomach. He recommended a slight dose of milk of magnesia. At 1:20 Mrs. Eisenhower called again, saying the President was still complaining of not feeling well. This time she asked Dr. Snyder to come to the White House from his home about a mile away on Connecticut Avenue. He arrived at 2 A.M. and has not left the President's side since.
^ Knighton, William Jr. (June 10, 1956). "Eisenhower Out Of Danger; Will Be Able To Resume Duties And Seek Reelection: Doctors See Prospect of Full Return to Job in Four to Six Weeks: Operation Performed to Prevent Gangrene of Bowel: Signing of Official Papers Viewed as Likely by Tomorrow or Tuesday". The Baltimore Sun. p. 1. Retrieved December 22, 2016.
^ "Out of Hospital Visit Postponed". The New York Times. July 1, 1956. p. E2. Retrieved December 22, 2016.
^ Williams, Charles Harold Macmillan (2009) p. 345
^ a b c "President Dwight Eisenhower: Health & Medical History". doctorzebra.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2013.
^ "Eisenhower Presidential Library and Museum". Eisenhower.archives.gov. Archived from the original on November 15, 2011. Retrieved December 10, 2011.
^ Messerli F. H., Loughlin K. R., Messerli A. W., Welch W. R.: The President and the pheochromocytoma. Am J Cardiol 2007; 99: 1325 1329.
^ "Former Presidents Act". National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on June 14, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ Nixon, Richard, The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, 1978, pp. 222 223.
^ a b c "Dwight D. Eisenhower Farewell Address". USA Presidents. Archived from the original on May 13, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ Post Presidential Years Archived January 14, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Eisenhower Archives. "President Kennedy reactivated his commission as a five star general in the United States Army. With the exception of George Washington, Eisenhower is the only United States President with military service to reenter the Armed Forces after leaving the office of President."
^ "John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum, A Chronology from The New York Times, March 1961". March 23, 1961. Archived from the original on May 3, 2006. Retrieved May 30, 2009. Mr. Kennedy signed into law the act of Congress restoring the five-star rank of General of the Army to his predecessor, Dwight D. Eisenhower. (15:5)
^ Klaus, Mary (August 8, 1985). "Tiny Pennsylvania Town An Escape From Modernity". Sun-Sentinel. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2016. From this farm the family migrated to Kansas in the summer of 1878.
^ Gasbarro, Norman (November 29, 2010). "Eisenhower Family Civil War Veterans". Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2016. a stately old home, identified as the ancestral home of President Dwight D. Eisenhower
^ Historical Society of Palm Desert; Rover, Hal; Kousken, Kim; Romer, Brett (2009). Palm Desert. Charleston, SC: Arcadia Publishing. p. 103. ISBN 978-0738559643.
^ "Eisenhower, Dwight D.: visit to San Antonio in behalf of John Goode and Henry Catto, Jr.; downtown San Antonio". University of Texas Library. October 29, 1961. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016.
^ "Ike at Gettysburg (Goldwater, 1964)". 1964: Johnson vs. Goldwater. Museum of the Moving Image. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2011.
^ Goldschlag, William (May 11, 2016). "When an ex-president helped an 'extreme' Republican candidate". Newsday. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2016.
^ "Inauguration Is a Day For Rejoicing: Ike". Chicago Tribune. January 21, 1969. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved August 19, 2017.
^ a b "Dwight D. Eisenhower   Final Post". Washington, D.C.: Presidential Libraries System, National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2019.
^ "Lying in State or in Honor". Washington, D.C.: Architect of the Capitol. Archived from the original on May 18, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2019.
^ a b Belair, Felix Jr. (April 1, 1969). "World's Leaders Join in Services for Eisenhower". The New York Times. p. 1.
^ Grose, Peter (March 31, 1969). "Nixon will Meet with De Gaulle Today". The New York Times. p. 1. President de Gaulle arrived by plane from Paris, on his first visit to the United States since the funeral of President Kennedy in 1963.
^ "For A Modest Man: A Simple Funeral Honors Ike". The Desert Sun. Vol. 42, no. 205. Palm Springs, California. UPI. April 1, 1969. Retrieved May 19, 2019   via California Digital Newspaper Collection, Center for Bibliographical Studies and Research at the University of California Riverside.
^ Weissert, Will; Phillip, David J. (December 6, 2018). "Bushes depart on first presidential funeral train since 1969". MilitaryTimes.com. Tysons, Virginia: Sightline Media Group. The Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2019.
^ "1969 Year in Review: Eisenhower, Judy Garland die". UPI. October 25, 2005. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016. Retrieved December 19, 2016.
^ Frum 2000, p. 27
^ Walsh, Kenneth T. (June 6, 2008). "Presidential Lies and Deceptions". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on September 29, 2008.
^ Walker, Samuel, ed. (2012), Presidents and Civil Liberties from Wilson to Obama, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. i ii, ISBN 978-1-107-01660-6, retrieved February 26, 2023
^ "Presidential Politics". Public Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on June 6, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008.
^ McMahon, Robert J. (1986). "Eisenhower and Third World Nationalism: A Critique of the Revisionists". Political Science Quarterly. 101 (3): 453 473. doi:10.2307/2151625. ISSN 0032-3195. JSTOR 2151625.
^ Pach, Chester J. Jr. (October 4, 2016). "Dwight D. Eisenhower: Impact and Legacy". Miller Center. Retrieved February 26, 2023.
^ RABE, STEPHEN G. (1993). "Eisenhower Revisionism: A Decade of Scholarship". Diplomatic History. 17 (1): 97 115. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7709.1993.tb00160.x. ISSN 0145-2096. JSTOR 24912261.
^ John Lewis Gaddis, "He Made It Look Easy: 'Eisenhower in War and Peace', by Jean Edward Smith" Archived February 6, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, New York Times Book Review, April 20, 2012.
^ a b Griffith, Robert (January 1, 1982). "Dwight D. Eisenhower and the Corporate Commonwealth". The American Historical Review. 87 (1): 87 122. doi:10.2307/1863309. JSTOR 1863309.
^ "The President and His Decision". Life Magazine. March 12, 1956.
^ Morgenthau, Hans J.: "Goldwater  The Romantic Regression", in Commentary, September 1964.
^ Medved, Michael (1979). The Shadow Presidents: The Secret History of the Chief Executives and Their Top Aides. New York: Times Books. ISBN 0812908163.
^ "Public Law 482". Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved April 29, 2008. This law allowed only 75% of pay and allowances to the grade for those on the retired list.
^ "Public Law 333, 79th Congress". Naval Historical Center. April 11, 2007. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved October 22, 2007. The retirement provisions were also applied to the World War II Commandant of the Marine Corps and the Commandant of the Coast Guard, both of whom held four-star rank.
^ "Public Law 79-333" (PDF). legisworks.org. Legis Works. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 21, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015.
^ "Our Heritage". People to People International. Archived from the original on March 1, 2009. Retrieved September 29, 2009.
^ a b c Gomez, Darryl (2015). Authoritative Numismatic Reference: Presidential Medal of Appreciation Award Medals 1958 1963. North Charleston, S.C.: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. ISBN 978-1511786744.
^ "Dwight D. Eisenhower". aoc.gov. Architect of the Capitol. Archived from the original on November 29, 2008. Retrieved November 29, 2008.
^ "Dwight D. Eisenhower Highway". Federal Highway Administration. Archived from the original on August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2016.
^ "Record Companies Run With Eisenhower Tribute Albums". Billboard. April 12, 1969. Retrieved December 2, 2015.
^ "Frank Gehry to design Eisenhower Memorial". American City Business Journals. April 1, 2009. Archived from the original on April 4, 2009.
^ Trescott, Jacqueline (April 2, 2009). "Architect Gehry Gets Design Gig For Eisenhower Memorial". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 3, 2017. Retrieved August 26, 2017.
^ Horan, Tim (May 8, 2020). "Eisenhower Memorial in D.C. is complete. Coronavirus delays dedication to September". The Wichita Eagle. Retrieved May 8, 2020.
^ "Dedication Of Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial" (PDF). Eisenhower Memorial Commission.
^ Plumb, Tiereny (January 22, 2010). "Gilbane to manage design and construction of Eisenhower Memorial". American City Business Journals.
^ "President Eisenhower named to World Golf Hall of Fame". PGA Tour. Archived from the original on June 29, 2009. Retrieved May 3, 2010.
^ "Hall of Great Westerners". National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum. Retrieved November 22, 2019.
^ The Naming Commission (Aug 2022) Recommendation
^ Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands in an interview with H.G. Meijer, published in "Het Vliegerkruis", Amsterdam 1997, ISBN 9067073474. p. 92.
^ "The Arms of Dwight D. Eisenhower". American Heraldry Society. Archived from the original on February 2, 2015.
^ a b "Awards & Medals | Eisenhower Presidential Library". www.eisenhowerlibrary.gov. Retrieved April 28, 2020.
^ "USA and Foreign Decorations of Dwight D. Eisenhower". Eisenhower Presidential Center. Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2012.
^ "Questions to the Chancellor" (PDF). Austrian Parliament. 2012. p. 194. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved September 30, 2012.
^ Eisenhower, John S. D. Allies.
^ "Eisenhower to get honor". The New York Times. June 10, 1945. Retrieved August 26, 2020.
^ London Welcomes Her Newest Citizen (Newsreel). British Movietone News. 1945.  Event occurs at 1:18. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2020   via Associated Press and YouTube.
^ a b "Eisenhower in Ulster". Belfast Telegraph. July 5, 2008. Retrieved August 26, 2020.
^ Eisenhower's Scottish Diary (Newsreel). British Path .  Event occurs at 0:13. Retrieved August 26, 2020.
^ "President Eisenhower in Carrick". maybole.org. Retrieved August 26, 2020.
^ "Honorary Degrees 1871 2018" (PDF). Queen's University Belfast. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 4, 2020.
^ "Oxford Degrees for War Leaders". British Path . 1945.
^ "Honorary Degrees". Harvard University. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017. Retrieved August 26, 2020.
^ "Honorary degree recipients". Gettysburg College.
^ "Honorary Degree Recipients, 1850 2021" (PDF). University of Toronto. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 1, 2020.
^ "Chronological Listing of Honorary Degree Recipients" (PDF). University of Pennsylvania. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 29, 2019.
^ "Honorary Degrees Since 1702". Office of the Secretary and Vice President for University Life, Yale University.
^ "About: Honorary Degrees". Hofstra University.
^ "President Eisenhower's Commencement Address". Dartmouth College. November 28, 2018.
^ "Honorary Degrees Conferred by The Catholic University of America" (PDF). Catholic University of America. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 22, 2020.
^ "Honorary Degree Recipients". Office of the Provost, Northwestern University.
^ Eisenhower, Dwight D. (June 7, 1954). Remarks at Washington College on Receiving an Honorary Doctor of Laws Degree (Speech). Washington College, Maryland: Washington College. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved January 9, 2022.
^ "Honorary Degrees Awarded". Johns Hopkins University.
^ "India Likes Ike". British Path . 1959.
^ "Honorary Degree Recipients, 1844 2019" (PDF). University of Notre Dame. November 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 22, 2020. Retrieved August 26, 2020.
^ "Eisenhower Given Honorary Degree at Bard College". The New York Times. June 21, 1964.
^ "Past Honorary Degrees". Grinnell College.
^ "U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower with commemorative plaque at Ohio University Memorial Auditorium". Ohio University Libraries. October 5, 1965.
Bibliography
Main article: Bibliography of Dwight D. Eisenhower
General biographies
Ambrose, Stephen (1983). Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army, President-Elect (1893 1952). Vol. I. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Ambrose, Stephen (1984). Eisenhower: The President (1952 1969). Vol. II. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Boyle, Peter G. (2005). Eisenhower. Pearson/Longman. ISBN 0582287200. OCLC 55665502.
D'Este, Carlo (2002). Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life. ISBN 0805056866.
Krieg, Joann P. ed. (1987). Dwight D. Eisenhower, Soldier, President, Statesman. 24 essays by scholars. ISBN 0313259550
Newton, Jim (2011). Eisenhower: The White House Years. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-52353-0., popular history.
Parmet, Herbert S. (1972). Eisenhower and the American Crusades. OCLC 482017.
Smith, Jean Edward (2012). Eisenhower in War and Peace. Random House. ISBN 978-1400066933.
Wicker, Tom (2002). Dwight D. Eisenhower. Times Books. ISBN 0805069070. OCLC 49893871., popular history
Military career
Ambrose, Stephen E. (January 17, 2012). The Supreme Commander. ISBN 9780307946638.
Ambrose, Stephen E. (July 15, 1999). The Victors: Eisenhower and His Boys the Men of World War II. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 9780684864549.
Eisenhower, David (1986). Eisenhower at War 1943 1945, New York : Random House. ISBN 0394412370. A detailed study by his grandson.
Eisenhower, John S. D. (2003). General Ike, Free Press, New York. ISBN 0743244745, by his son.
Hatch, Alden. General Eisenhower (1944) online, early popular biography.
Hobbs, Joseph Patrick (1999). Dear General: Eisenhower's Wartime Letters to Marshall. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0801862191.
Irish, Kerry E. "Apt Pupil: Dwight Eisenhower and the 1930 Industrial Mobilization Plan", The Journal of Military History 70.1 (2006) 31 61 online in Project Muse.
Jordan, Jonathan W. (2011). Brothers Rivals Victors: Eisenhower, Patton, Bradley, and the Partnership that Drove the Allied Conquest in Europe. NAL/Caliber. ISBN 978-0451232120. OCLC 617565184.
Jordan, Jonathan W. (2015). American Warlords: How Roosevelt's High Command Led America to Victory in World War II. NAL/Caliber. ISBN 978-0451414571. OCLC 892458610.
Pogue, Forrest C. (1954). The Supreme Command. Office of the Chief of Military History, Dept. of the Army. OCLC 1247005.
Weigley, Russell (1981). Eisenhower's Lieutenants: the Campaign of France and Germany, 1944 1945. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0253133335. OCLC 6863111.
Civilian career
Bowie, Robert R.; Immerman, Richard H. (February 12, 1998). Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold War Strategy. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199879083.
Chernus, Ira (2008). Apocalypse Management: Eisenhower and the Discourse of National Insecurity. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804758079. OCLC 105454244.
Cook, Blanche Wiesen (1981). The Declassified Eisenhower: A Divided Legacy. Doubleday.
Damms, Richard V. (2002). The Eisenhower Presidency, 1953 1961
David Paul T., ed. (1954). Presidential Nominating Politics in 1952. 5 vols., Johns Hopkins Press. OCLC 519846
Divine, Robert A. (1981). Eisenhower and the Cold War.
Gellman, Irwin F. (2015). The President and the Apprentice: Eisenhower and Nixon, 1952 1961. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0300181050 OCLC 910504324
Greenstein, Fred I. (1991). The Hidden-Hand Presidency: Eisenhower as Leader. Basic Books. ISBN 0465029485 OCLC 8765635
Harris, Douglas B. "Dwight Eisenhower and the New Deal: The Politics of Preemption", Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 27, 1997.
Harris, Seymour E. (1962). The Economics of the Political Parties, with Special Attention to Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy. OCLC 174566
Jacobs, Travis Beal (1993). "Eisenhower, the American Assembly, and the 1952 Elections".  In Warshaw, Shirley Anne (ed.). Reexamining the Eisenhower presidency. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. pp. 17 32. ISBN 0313287929.
Jacobs, Travis Beal (2001). Eisenhower at Columbia. Piscataway, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-7658-0036-5.
Lasby,  Clarence G. Eisenhower's Heart Attack: How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency (1997).
Mason, Robert. "War Hero in the White House: Dwight Eisenhower and the Politics of Peace, Prosperity, and Party." in Profiles in Power (Brill, 2020) pp. 112 128.
Medhurst, Martin J. (1993). Dwight D. Eisenhower: Strategic Communicator. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0313261407 OCLC 26764309
Mayer, Michael S. (2009). The Eisenhower Years Facts on File. ISBN 0816053871
Newton, Jim. (2011) Eisenhower: The White House Years ISBN 978-0385523530 OCLC 694394274
Pach, Chester J., and Richardson, Elmo (1991). Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower. University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0700604367 OCLC 22307949
Pickett, William B. (2000). Eisenhower Decides to Run: Presidential Politics and Cold War Strategy. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 1-56-663787-2. OCLC 43953970.
Pickett, William B. (1995). Dwight David Eisenhower and American Power. Wheeling, Ill.: Harlan Davidson. ISBN 0-88-295918-2. OCLC 31206927.
Watry, David M. (2014). Diplomacy at the Brink: Eisenhower, Churchill and Eden in the Cold War. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.
General history
Bundy, McGeorge (1988). Danger and Survival: Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-52278-8.
Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The 70s The Decade That Brought You Modern Life   For Better Or Worse. New York, New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-04196-5.
Grant, Rebecca (June 1, 2001). "Deep Strife". Air & Space Forces Magazine.
Owen, David (1999). The Making of the Masters: Clifford Roberts, Augusta National, and Golf's Most Prestigious Tournament. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0684857294.
Young, Ken; Schilling, Warner R. (2019). Super Bomb: Organizational Conflict and the Development of the Hydrogen Bomb. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-1-5017-4516-4.
Primary sources
Boyle, Peter G., ed. (1990). The Churchill Eisenhower Correspondence, 1953 1955. University of North Carolina Press.
Boyle, Peter G., ed. (2005). The Eden Eisenhower correspondence, 1955 1957. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0807829358
Butcher, Harry C. (1946). My Three Years With Eisenhower The Personal Diary of Captain Harry C. Butcher, USNR, candid memoir by a top aide. online
Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1948). Crusade in Europe, his war memoirs.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1963). Mandate for Change, 1953 1956.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1965). The White House Years: Waging Peace 1956 1961, Doubleday and Co.
Eisenhower Papers 21-volume scholarly edition; complete for 1940 1961.
Summersby, Kay (1948). Eisenhower Was My Boss, New York: Prentice Hall; (1949) Dell paperback.
External links
Dwight D. Eisenhower  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource
White House biography
Eisenhower Presidential Library and Museum
Eisenhower National Historic Site
Eisenhower Foundation
Major speeches of Dwight Eisenhower
Dwight David Eisenhower collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Dwight D. Eisenhower: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
Extensive essays on Dwight Eisenhower and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
"Life Portrait of Dwight D. Eisenhower", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, October 25, 1999
Works by Dwight David Eisenhower at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Dwight D. Eisenhower at Internet Archive
Appearances on C-SPAN
vteDwight D. Eisenhower
34th President of the United States (1953 1961)
Supreme Allied Commander Europe (1951 1952)
Chief of Staff of the Army (1945 1948)
Commander, Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (1943 1945)
Militarycareer
Military career
1919 Motor Transport Corps convoy
Louisiana Maneuvers
Operation Torch
European Theater of Operations
Allied invasion of Sicily
June 6, 1944, order of the day
People of Western Europe speech
Normandy landings
Operation Veritable
Berlin Declaration
Military Governor, U.S. Occupation Zone in Germany
Disarmed Enemy Forces
European Advisory Commission
Supreme Commander of NATO, 1951-1952
Presidency
Presidency
Foreign policy
Transition
1953 inauguration
1957 inauguration
Korean War Armistice
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
"Chance for Peace" speech
"Atoms for Peace" speech
Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act of 1954
Air Pollution Control Act of 1955
Bank Holding Company Act
Civil Rights Act of 1957
Civil Rights Act of 1960
Cold War
Domino theory
Khrushchev, Eisenhower and De-Stalinization
New Look policy
1955 Geneva Summit
1960 U-2 incident
DARPA
National Defense Education Act
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956
Interstate Highway System
National Aeronautics and Space Act
NASA
Suez Crisis
Eisenhower Doctrine
Little Rock Nine intervention
Operation 40
Farewell address / "Military industrial complex"
Office of Food for Peace
President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports
People to People Student Ambassador Program
State of the Union Address (1955
1956
1960)
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Presidential transition of John F. Kennedy
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Books
Crusade in Europe (1948)
Elections
Draft Eisenhower movement
Republican Party presidential primaries (1948
1952
1956)
Republican National Convention (1952
1956)
United States Presidential election (1952
1956)
Legacy
Bibliography
Birthplace
Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, gravesite
Boyhood home
Eisenhower National Historic Site
Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial
Eisenhower Executive Office Building
Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport
Eisenhower Fellowships
Eisenhower Institute
Eisenhower Monument
Eisenhower dollar
commemorative
U.S. Postage stamps
Dwight D. Eisenhower Army Medical Center
Eisenhower Medical Center
Eisenhower Trophy
Eisenhower Golf Club
Eisenhower Theater
Statue of Dwight D. Eisenhower (U.S. Capitol)
Mount Eisenhower
Places named for Eisenhower
Other tributes and memorials
Popularculture
Eisenhower jacket
Eisenhower Tree
Crusade in Europe (1949 television series)
Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries)
Ike (1979 miniseries)
Ike: Countdown to D-Day (2004 film)
Pressure (2014 play)
Family
 Mary "Mamie" Geneva Doud Eisenhower (wife)
John Eisenhower (son)
David Eisenhower (grandson)
Anne Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Susan Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Mary Jean Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Jennie Eisenhower (great-granddaughter)
Ida Stover Eisenhower (mother)
Arthur Eisenhower (brother)
Edgar N. Eisenhower (brother)
Roy Eisenhower (brother)
Earl D. Eisenhower (brother)
Milton S. Eisenhower (brother)
Related
Eisenhower baseball controversy
Camp David
"And I don't care what it is"
Atoms for Peace Award
Introduction to Outer Space
Eddie Slovik
Kay Summersby
  Harry S. Truman
John F. Kennedy  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
Military offices
Preceded byJames Chaney
 Commanding General of the United States Army Europe 1942 1943
Succeeded byFrank Maxwell Andrews
Preceded byJacob L. Devers
 Commanding General of the United States Army Europe 1944 1945
Succeeded byJoseph T. McNarney
New office
 Governor of the American Zone of Occupied Germany 1945
Succeeded byGeorge S. PattonActing
Preceded byGeorge Marshall
 Chief of Staff of the United States Army 1945 1948
Succeeded byOmar Bradley
New office
 Supreme Allied Commander Europe 1951 1952
Succeeded byMatthew Ridgway
Academic offices
Preceded byFrank D. FackenthalActing
 President of Columbia University 1948 1953
Succeeded byGrayson L. Kirk
Party political offices
Preceded byThomas E. Dewey
 Republican nominee for President of the United States 1952, 1956
Succeeded byRichard Nixon
Political offices
Preceded byHarry S. Truman
 President of the United States 1953 1961
Succeeded byJohn F. Kennedy
Honorary titles
Preceded byHerbert Hoover
 People who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1969
Succeeded byEverett Dirksen
Articles related to Dwight D. Eisenhower
vteSt. Mary's Rattlers head football coaches
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1916)
Homer Baker (1923)
J. Kraus (1924)
Tim Griesenbeck (1927)
Jim Hendricks (1928)
Barlow Irvin (1929 1930)
No team (1932 1934)
Frank Bridges (1935 1939)
Mose Simms (1940)
Lloyd Russell (1941)
vteLeaders of the United States ArmySenior Officer / Commanding General
Washington
Knox
Doughty
Harmar
St. Clair
Wayne
Hamilton
Wilkinson
Dearborn
J. Brown
Macomb
W. Scott
McClellan
Halleck
Grant
Sherman
Sheridan
Schofield
Miles
Chiefs of Staff
Young
Chaffee
Bates
Bell
Wood
Wotherspoon
H. Scott
Bliss
March
Pershing
Hines
Summerall
MacArthur
Craig
Marshall
Eisenhower
Bradley
Collins
Ridgway
Taylor
Lemnitzer
Decker
Wheeler
Johnson
Westmoreland
B. Palmer
Abrams
Weyand
Rogers
Meyer
Wickham
Vuono
Sullivan
Reimer
Shinseki
Schoomaker
Casey
Dempsey
Odierno
Milley
McConville
Vice Chiefs of Staff
Collins
Haislip
Hull
Bolte
W. Palmer
Lemnitzer
Decker
Eddleman
Hamlett
Abrams
Haines
B. Palmer
Haig
Weyand
Kerwin
Kroesen
Vessey
Wickham
Thurman
A. Brown
RisCassi
Sullivan
Reimer
Peay
Tilelli
Griffith
Crouch
Shinseki
Keane
Casey
Cody
Chiarelli
Austin
Campbell
Allyn
McConville
Martin
George
Commanders of United States European Command and Supreme Allied Commanders, Europe
Eisenhower*
Ridgway
Gruenther
Norstad
Lemnitzer
Goodpaster
Haig
Rogers
Galvin
Shalikashvili
Joulwan
Clark
Ralston
Jones
Craddock
Stavridis
Breedlove
Scaparrotti
* only Supreme Allied Commander
vteRepublican Party
History
National Union Party
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Presidentialticketsandnationalconventions
1856 (Philadelphia): Fr mont/Dayton
1860 (Chicago): Lincoln/Hamlin
1864 (Baltimore): Lincoln/Johnson
1868 (Chicago): Grant/Colfax
1872 (Philadelphia): Grant/Wilson
1876 (Cincinnati): Hayes/Wheeler
1880 (Chicago): Garfield/Arthur
1884 (Chicago): Blaine/Logan
1888 (Chicago): Harrison/Morton
1892 (Minneapolis): Harrison/Reid
1896 (Saint Louis): McKinley/Hobart
1900 (Philadelphia): McKinley/Roosevelt
1904 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Fairbanks
1908 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman
1912 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman/Butler
1916 (Chicago): Hughes/Fairbanks
1920 (Chicago): Harding/Coolidge
1924 (Cleveland): Coolidge/Dawes
1928 (Kansas City): Hoover/Curtis
1932 (Chicago): Hoover/Curtis
1936 (Cleveland): Landon/Knox
1940 (Philadelphia): Willkie/McNary
1944 (Chicago): Dewey/Bricker
1948 (Philadelphia): Dewey/Warren
1952 (Chicago): Eisenhower/Nixon
1956 (San Francisco): Eisenhower/Nixon
1960 (Chicago): Nixon/Lodge
1964 (San Francisco): Goldwater/Miller
1968 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1972 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1976 (Kansas City): Ford/Dole
1980 (Detroit): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1984 (Dallas): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1988 (New Orleans): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1992 (Houston): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1996 (San Diego): Dole/Kemp
2000 (Philadelphia): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2004 (New York): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2008 (St. Paul): McCain/Palin
2012 (Tampa): Romney/Ryan
2016 (Cleveland): Trump/Pence
2020 (Charlotte/other locations): Trump/Pence
2024 (Milwaukee)
Presidentialadministrations
Lincoln (1861 1865)
Johnson (1865 1868)
Grant (1869 1877)
Hayes (1877 1881)
Garfield (1881)
Arthur (1881 1885)
Harrison (1889 1893)
McKinley (1897 1901)
Roosevelt (1901 1909)
Taft (1909 1913)
Harding (1921 1923)
Coolidge (1923 1929)
Hoover (1929 1933)
Eisenhower (1953 1961)
Nixon (1969 1974)
Ford (1974 1977)
Reagan (1981 1989)
G. H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
G. W. Bush (2001 2009)
Trump (2017 2021)
U.S. SenateleadersandConferencechairs
J. P. Hale (1859 1862)
Anthony (1862 1884)
Sherman (1884 1885)
Edmunds (1885 1891)
Sherman (1891 1897)
Allison (1897 1908)
E. Hale (1908 1911)
Cullom (1911 1913)
Gallinger (1913 1918)
Lodge (1918 1924)
Curtis (1924 1929)
Watson (1929 1933)
McNary (1933 1940)
Austin (1940 1941)
McNary (1941 1944)
White (1944 1949)
Wherry (1949 1952)
Bridges (1952 1953)
Taft (1953)
Knowland (1953 1959)
Dirksen (1959 1969)
Scott (1969 1977)
Baker (1977 1979)
Stevens (1979 1980)
Baker (1980 1985)
Dole (1985 1996)
Lott (1996 2003)
Frist (2003 2007)
McConnell (2007 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andConferencechairs
Pennington (1860 1861)
Grow (1861 1863)
Colfax (1863 1869)
Pomeroy (1869)
Blaine (1869 1875)
McCrary (1875 1877)
Hale (1877 1879)
Frye (1879 1881)
Keifer (1881 1883)
Cannon (1883 1889)
Reed (1889 1891)
T. J. Henderson (1891 1895)
Reed (1895 1899)
D. B. Henderson (1899 1903)
Cannon (1903 1911)
Mann (1911 1919)
Gillett (1919 1925)
Longworth (1925 1931)
Snell (1931 1939)
Martin (1939 1959)
Halleck (1959 1965)
Ford (1965 1973)
Rhodes (1973 1981)
Michel (1981 1995)
Gingrich (1995 1999)
Hastert (1999 2007)
Boehner (2007 2015)
Ryan (2015 2019)
McCarthy (2019 )
RNCChairs
Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Campbell
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Mart nez/Duncan
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
McDaniel
Chair elections
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Parties bystate andterritoryState
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Territory
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Affiliated  organizationsFundraisinggroups
National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Redistricting Trust
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Governors Association
Sectionalgroups
College Republicans
Chairmen
Congressional Hispanic Conference
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans
Republicans Overseas
Factionalgroups
Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
Republican Governance Group
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List
Related
Primaries
Debates
Bibliography
International Democrat Union
Timeline of modern American conservatism
Trumpism
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteCabinet of President Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)CabinetVice President
Richard Nixon (1953 1961)
Secretary of State
John Foster Dulles (1953 1959)
Christian Herter (1959 1961)
Secretary of the Treasury
George M. Humphrey (1953 1957)
Robert B. Anderson (1957 1961)
Secretary of Defense
Charles Erwin Wilson (1953 1957)
Neil H. McElroy (1957 1959)
Thomas S. Gates Jr. (1959 1961)
Attorney General
Herbert Brownell Jr. (1953 1957)
William P. Rogers (1957 1961)
Postmaster General
Arthur Summerfield (1953 1961)
Secretary of the Interior
Douglas McKay (1953 1956)
Fred A. Seaton (1956 1961)
Secretary of Agriculture
Ezra Taft Benson (1953 1961)
Secretary of Commerce
Sinclair Weeks (1953 1958)
Frederick H. Mueller (1959 1961)
Secretary of Labor
Martin Patrick Durkin (1953)
James P. Mitchell (1953 1961)
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
Oveta Culp Hobby (1953 1955)
Marion B. Folsom (1955 1958)
Arthur Flemming (1958 1961)
Cabinet-levelDirector of the Bureau of the Budget
Joseph Dodge (1953 1954)
Rowland Hughes (1954 1956)
Percival Brundage (1956 1958)
Maurice Stans (1958 1961)
Ambassador to the United Nations
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. (1953 1960)
James Jeremiah Wadsworth (1960 1961)
Director of the Mutual Security Agency
Harold Stassen (1953)
Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization
Arthur Flemming (1953 1957)
Gordon Gray (1957 1958)
Administrator of the Federal Civil Defense Administration
Val Peterson (1953 1957)
Leo Hoegh (1957 1958)
Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Leo Hoegh (1958 1961)
Chair of the Atomic Energy Commission
John A. McCone (1958 1961)
White House Chief of Staff
Sherman Adams (1953 1958)
Wilton Persons (1958 1961)
White House Deputy Chief of Staff
Wilton Persons (1953 1958)
Gerald D. Morgan (1958 1961)
White House Cabinet Secretary
Maxwell M. Rabb (1954 1958)
Robert Keith Gray (1958 1961)
vtePresidents of Columbia University
S. Johnson
Cooper
B. Moore #
Clinton #
W. Johnson
Wharton
B. Moore
Harris
Duer
N. Moore
King
Barnard
Drisler #
Low
Van Amringe #
Butler
Fackenthal #
Eisenhower
Kirk
Cordier
McGill
Sovern
Rupp
Bollinger
Shafik
Pound sign (#) denotes interim president or chancellor
vte(  1948)   1952 United States presidential election   (  1956)Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower
VP nominee: Richard Nixon
Other candidates: Riley A. Bender
George T. Mickelson
Harold Stassen
Robert Taft
Earl Warren
Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II
VP nominee: John Sparkman
Other candidates: Alben W. Barkley
Paul A. Dever
W. Averell Harriman
Hubert Humphrey
Estes Kefauver
Robert S. Kerr
Richard Russell Jr.
Third party and independent candidatesProhibition Party
Nominee: Stuart Hamblen 
VP nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick
Progressive Party
Nominee: Vincent Hallinan
VP nominee: Charlotta Bass
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Eric Hass 
Socialist Party
Nominee: Darlington Hoopes
VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
Edward Longstreet Bodin
Henry B. Krajewski
Homer Aubrey Tomlinson
Other 1952 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1952)   1956 United States presidential election   (  1960)Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower
Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon
Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II
VP nominee: Estes Kefauver
Other candidates: John S. Battle
Happy Chandler
James C. Davis
W. Averell Harriman
Lyndon B. Johnson
Frank Lausche
George Bell Timmerman Jr.
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton
VP nominee: Symon Gould
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick 
VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Eric Hass
VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Party
Nominee: Darlington Hoopes
VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
T. Coleman Andrews
Gerald L. K. Smith
Other 1956 elections: House
Senate
vteTheodore Roosevelt Award winners
1967: Eisenhower
1968: Saltonstall
1969: White
1970: Hovde
1971: Kraft Jr.
1972: Holland
1973: Bradley
1974: Owens
1975: Ford
1976: Hamilton
1977: Bradley
1978: Zornow
1979: Chandler
1980: Cooley
1981: Linkletter
1982: Cosby
1983: Palmer
1984: Lawrence
1985: Fleming
1986: Bush
1987: Zable
1988: Not presented
1989: Ebert
1990: Reagan
1991: Gibson
1992: Kemp
1993: Alexander
1994: Johnson
1995: Mathias
1996: Wooden
1997: Payne
1998: Dole
1999: Richardson
2000: Staubach
2001: Cohen
2002: Shriver
2003: de Varona
2004: Page
2005: Ride
2006: Kraft
2007: Tagliabue
2008: Glenn
2009: Albright
2010: Mitchell
2011: Dunwoody
2012: Allen
2013: Dungy
2014: Mills
2015: Jackson
2016: Ueberroth
2017: Brooke-Marciniak
2018: Wilmore
2019: Caslen
2020: Delaney
2021: McLendon
2022: Boudreaux
vteNational Football Foundation Gold Medal winners
1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower
1959: Douglas MacArthur
1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg
1961: John F. Kennedy
1962: Byron "Whizzer" White
1963: Roger Blough
1964: Donold B. Lourie
1965: Juan T. Trippe
1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik
1967: Frederick L. Hovde
1968: Chester J. LaRoche
1969: Richard Nixon
1970: Thomas J. Hamilton
1971: Ronald Reagan
1972: Gerald Ford
1973: John Wayne
1974: Gerald B. Zornow
1975: David Packard
1976: Edgar B. Speer
1977: Louis H. Wilson
1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy
1979: William P. Lawrence
1980: Walter J. Zable
1981: Justin W. Dart
1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown, Willie Davis,  Jack Kemp, Ron Kramer, Jim Swink
1983: Jack Kemp
1984: John F. McGillicuddy
1985: William I. Spencer
1986: William H. Morton
1987: Charles R. Meyer
1988: Clinton E. Frank
1989: Paul Brown
1990: Thomas H. Moorer
1991: George H. W. Bush
1992: Donald R. Keough
1993: Norman Schwarzkopf
1994: Thomas S. Murphy
1995: Harold Alfond
1996: Gene Corrigan
1997: Jackie Robinson
1998: John H. McConnell
1999: Keith Jackson
2000: Fred M. Kirby II
2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs
2002: George Steinbrenner
2003: Tommy Franks
2004: William V. Campbell
2005: Jon F. Hanson
2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden
2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach
2008: John Glenn
2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman
2010: Bill Cosby
2011: Robert Gates
2012: Roscoe Brown
2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell
2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss
2015: Condoleezza Rice
2016: Archie Manning
2017: None awarded
2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman
2019: Mark Harmon
vteTime Persons of the Year1927 1950
Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)
1951 1975
Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II  (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segr  / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward  (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
 The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell  (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
 American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt  (1975)
1976 2000
Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wa sa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin  (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeff Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)
2001 present
Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins  (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
 The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates  (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
 Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah  (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)
 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital  (2018)
Greta Thunberg (2019)
Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020)
Elon Musk (2021)
Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022)
vte Philippine Legion of Honor recipients Chief Commander(Punong Komandante)
Emilio Aguinaldo
Hassanal Bolkiah
Chiang Kai-shek
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Leonardo Espina
Francisco Franco
Jos  P. Laurel
Douglas MacArthur
Ferdinand Marcos
Imelda Marcos
Sergio Osme a
Jesse Robredo
Chino Roces
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Jaime Sin
Achmad Sukarno
Lorenzo Ta ada
Maxwell D. Taylor
Claudio Teehankee
Grand Commander(Marangal na Komandante)
Gilbert Teodoro
Emilio Yap
Fernando Zobel de Ayala
Jaime Zobel de Ayala
Jaime Augusto Zobel de Ayala
Napoleon G. Rama
Grand Officer(Marangal na Pinuno)
Teodoro Locs n Jr.
Commander (Komandante)
Benigno Aquino Jr.
Eulogio Balao
Sotero Cabahug
Alfredo Montelibano Sr.
Officer (Pinuno)
Benigno Aquino Jr.
Manny Pacquiao
Legionnaire(Lehiyonaryo)
Escuadr n 201
Teodoro Locsin Sr.
Geronima Pecson
Edith Nourse Rogers
Richard Sakakida
vte Order of Sikatuna recipients Grand Collar (Raja)
Juan Carlos I of Spain
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Bhumibol Adulyadej, King of Thailand
Chuan Leekpai
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono
Akihito, Emperor of Japan
Shinz  Abe
Grand Cross (Datu)
Robert Gerard Brinks
Daniel Inouye
Aftab Ahmad Khan
Graeme Matheson
Jerril Santos
George Yeo
Sadako Ogata
vteLain in state (United States)Lain in stateUS Capitol rotunda
Clay (1852)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
Stevens (1868)
Sumner (1874)
Wilson (1875)
Garfield (1881)
Logan (1886)
McKinley (1901)
L'Enfant (1909)
Dewey (1917)
Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921)
Harding (1923)
W. H. Taft (1930)
Pershing (1948)
R. A. Taft (1953)
Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
MacArthur (1964)
H. Hoover (1964)
Eisenhower (1969)
Dirksen (1969)
J. E. Hoover (1972)
Johnson (1973)
Humphrey (1978)
Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984)
Pepper (1989)
Reagan (2004, funeral)
Ford (2006 07, funeral)
Inouye (2012)
McCain (2018)
Bush (2018, funeral)
Lewis (2020)
Dole (2021)
Reid (2022)
National Statuary Hall
Cummings (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Young (2022)
House Chamber
Hooper (1875)
Herbert C. Hoover Building
Brown (1996)
Old Senate Chamber
Chase (1873)
Lain in honorUS Capitol rotunda
Chestnut and Gibson (1998)
Parks (2005)
Graham (2018)
Sicknick (2021)
Evans (2021)
Williams (2022)
Lain in reposeEast Room
Harrison (1841)
Taylor (1850)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
McKinley (1901)
Harding (1923)
Roosevelt (1945)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
Great Hall of theUS Supreme Court
Warren (1974)
Marshall (1993)
Burger (1995)
Brennan (1997)
Blackmun (1999)
Rehnquist (2005)
Scalia (2016)
Stevens (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Senate Chamber
Byrd (2010)
Lautenberg (2013)
Bold: Presidents and chief justices
Portals: Biography 1950s Kansas Texas Politics World War I World War II United States
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Finland
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
2
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
RKD Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
NARA
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dwight_D._Eisenhower&oldid=1149653175"