This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Brenda's Got a Baby" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
1991 single by 2Pac"Brenda's Got a Baby"Single by 2Pacfrom the album  2Pacalypse Now B-side"If My Homie Calls"ReleasedOctober 20, 1991Recorded1991GenreConscious hip hopLength3:55LabelInterscopeJiveSongwriter(s)Tupac ShakurDeon "Big D the Impossible" EvansProducer(s)The Underground Railroad2Pac singles chronology
"Trapped" (1991)
"Brenda's Got a Baby" (1991)
"If My Homie Calls" (1992)
Music video"Brenda's Got a Baby" on YouTubeAudio samplefilehelp
"Brenda's Got a Baby" is a song by American rapper 2Pac from his debut album, 2Pacalypse Now (1991). The song was first released as a promotional CD single a month prior to album's release and then, in February 1992, it was re-released as a double A-side single with the song "If My Homie Calls". The song, which features R&B singer Dave Hollister singing background vocals with Roniece Levias, is about a 12-year-old girl named Brenda who lives in a ghetto and has a baby she can't support. The song explores the issue of teen pregnancy and its effect on young mothers and their families. Like many of Shakur's songs, "Brenda's Got a Baby" draws from the plight of the impoverished. Using Brenda to represent young mothers in general, Shakur criticises the low level of support from the baby's father, the government, and society in general. Shakur wrote the song while filming the feature film Juice, after reading a newspaper article about a 12-year-old girl who became pregnant by her cousin and threw the baby into a trash compactor.[1]
Music video[edit]
The video of the song is in black-and-white. It was made to visualize what the rapper Shakur narrates. The first part shows Shakur and "Brenda" and then the actual story starts. Ethel "Edy" Proctor portrays Brenda.
The video begins with "based on a true story," although the characters themselves are fictitious (actors), Shakur wrote the song after reading a story in the newspaper of a 12-year-old girl getting pregnant by her cousin and trying to dispose of the baby in a trash can.
Parts of the video were included in Tupac: Resurrection, a 2003 documentary on 2Pac's life, in a television show later in the music video of "Ghetto Gospel", in the music video of "Changes" and appears as a bonus in its entirety on the film's DVD. Part of the video and song was played in 2Pac's biopic film, All Eyez on Me, released on June 16, 2017.
The video was directed by the Hughes brothers.
Charts[edit]
Chart (1991)
Peakposition
US Hot Rap Songs (Billboard)[2]
7
US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs (Billboard)[3]
23
References[edit]
^ Hedges, Chris (March 29, 1990). "A Child-Mother in the Jaws of New York". The New York Times. Retrieved July 23, 2016.
^ "2Pac Chart History (Hot Rap Songs)". Billboard.  Retrieved June 17, 2018.
^ "2Pac Chart History (Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs)". Billboard.   Retrieved June 17, 2018.
vteTupac Shakur
Discography
Songs
Awards and nominations
Death
Studio albums
2Pacalypse Now
Strictly 4 My N.I.G.G.A.Z...
Thug Life, Volume I
Me Against the World
All Eyez on Me
Posthumous albums
The Don Killuminati: The 7 Day Theory
R U Still Down? (Remember Me)
Still I Rise
Until the End of Time
Better Dayz
Loyal to the Game
Pac's Life
Live albums
2Pac Live
Live at the House of Blues
Compilation albums
Greatest Hits
The Rose That Grew from Concrete
The Prophet: The Best of the Works
Nu-Mixx Klazzics
Tupac: Resurrection
The Rose, Vol. 2
The Prophet Returns
Beginnings: The Lost Tapes 1988 1991
Nu-Mixx Klazzics Vol. 2
Best of 2Pac
Related albums
Nothing but Trouble (soundtrack)
Sons of the P
Juice (soundtrack)
Poetic Justice (soundtrack)
Above the Rim (soundtrack)
Gridlock'd (soundtrack)
Gang Related (soundtrack)
A 2Pac Tribute: Dare 2 Struggle
Extended plays
Don't Go 2 Sleep
Singles
"Brenda's Got a Baby"
"If My Homie Calls"
"Trapped"
"Holler If Ya Hear Me"
"I Get Around"
"Keep Ya Head Up"
"Papa'z Song"
"Cradle to the Grave"
"Dear Mama"
"So Many Tears"
"Temptations"
"California Love"
"2 of Amerikaz Most Wanted"
"How Do U Want It"
"I Ain't Mad at Cha"
"Toss It Up"
"To Live & Die in LA"
"Hail Mary"
"Wanted Dead or Alive"
Posthumous singles
"I Wonder If Heaven Got a Ghetto"
"Do for Love"
"Changes"
"Unconditional Love"
"Baby Don't Cry (Keep Ya Head Up II)"
"Until the End of Time"
"Letter 2 My Unborn"
"Thugz Mansion"
"Still Ballin'"
"Runnin' (Dying to Live)"
"One Day at a Time (Em's Version)"
"Thugs Get Lonely Too"
"Ghetto Gospel"
"Untouchable"
"Pac's Life"
"Playa Cardz Right"
Other songs
"I Don't Give a Fuck"
"Runnin' from tha Police"
"Hit 'Em Up"
"Are U Still Down"
"Panther Power"
Featured singles
"Gotta Get Mine"
"Smile"
"Playa Cardz Right"
Books
The Rose That Grew from Concrete
Stage
Holler If Ya Hear Me
Documentaries
Biggie & Tupac
Tupac: Resurrection
Tupac: Assassination
Outlawz
Yaki Kadafi
Kastro
Napoleon
E.D.I. Mean
Hussein Fatal
Mussolini
Komani
Young Noble
Related articles
Outlawz
Digital Underground
Afeni Shakur
Assata Shakur
Mopreme Shakur
Mutulu Shakur
Thug Life
East Coast West Coast hip hop rivalry
Niccol  Machiavelli
Orlando Anderson
Tupac Amaru Shakur Center for the Arts
All Eyez on Me (film)
Unsolved: The Murders of Tupac and the Notorious B.I.G.
City of Lies
Authority control 
MusicBrainz work
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brenda%27s_Got_a_Baby&oldid=1147416942"