President of the United States from 1961 to 1963
For other uses, see John F. Kennedy (disambiguation).
"JFK", "Jack Kennedy", and "John Kennedy" redirect here. For other uses, see JFK (disambiguation), Jack Kennedy (disambiguation), and John Kennedy (disambiguation).
John F. KennedyOval Office portrait, July 196335th President of the United StatesIn officeJanuary 20, 1961  November 22, 1963Vice PresidentLyndon B. JohnsonPreceded byDwight D. EisenhowerSucceeded byLyndon B. JohnsonUnited States Senatorfrom MassachusettsIn officeJanuary 3, 1953  December 22, 1960Preceded byHenry Cabot Lodge Jr.Succeeded byBenjamin A. Smith IIMember of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Massachusetts's 11th districtIn officeJanuary 3, 1947  January 3, 1953Preceded byJames Michael CurleySucceeded byTip O'Neill
Personal detailsBornJohn Fitzgerald Kennedy(1917-05-29)May 29, 1917Brookline, Massachusetts, U.S.DiedNovember 22, 1963(1963-11-22) (aged 46)Dallas, Texas, U.S.Manner of deathAssassinationResting placeArlington National CemeteryPolitical partyDemocraticSpouseJacqueline Bouvier  (m. 1953) Children
Arabella
Caroline
John Jr.
Patrick
Parents
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.
Rose Fitzgerald
RelativesKennedy familyEducationHarvard University (AB)SignatureMilitary serviceBranch/serviceUnited States NavyYears of service1941 1945RankLieutenantUnit
Motor Torpedo Squadron 2
Patrol Torpedo Boat 109
Patrol Torpedo Boat 59
Battles/wars
World War II
Solomon Islands campaign
Awards
Navy and Marine Corps Medal
Purple Heart
American Defense Service Medal
American Campaign Medal
Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal (with 3 service stars)
World War II Victory Medal[1]
John F. Kennedy's voice
Kennedy on the establishment of the Peace CorpsRecorded March 1, 1961
John Fitzgerald Kennedy (May 29, 1917   November 22, 1963), often referred to by his initials JFK, was an American politician who served as the 35th president of the United States from 1961 until his assassination in 1963. He was the youngest person to assume the presidency by election and the youngest president at the end of his tenure.[2] Kennedy served at the height of the Cold War, and the majority of his foreign policy concerned relations with the Soviet Union and Cuba. A Democrat, Kennedy represented Massachusetts in both houses of the U.S. Congress prior to his presidency.
Born into the prominent Kennedy family in Brookline, Massachusetts, Kennedy graduated from Harvard University in 1940 before joining the U.S. Naval Reserve the following year. During World War II, he commanded a series of PT boats in the Pacific theater. Kennedy's survival following the sinking of PT-109 and his rescue of his fellow sailors made him a war hero and earned the Navy and Marine Corps Medal, but left him with serious injuries. After a brief stint in journalism, Kennedy represented a working-class Boston district in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953. He was subsequently elected to the U.S. Senate and served as the junior senator for Massachusetts from 1953 to 1960. While in the Senate, Kennedy published his book, Profiles in Courage, which won a Pulitzer Prize. Kennedy ran in the 1960 presidential election. His campaign gained momentum after the first televised presidential debates in American history, and he was elected president, narrowly defeating Republican opponent Richard Nixon, who was the incumbent vice president. He was the first Catholic elected president.
Kennedy's administration included high tensions with communist states in the Cold War. He increased the number of American military advisors in South Vietnam. He authorized numerous operations to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro, including the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961. The following October,  U.S. spy planes discovered Soviet missile bases in Cuba; the resulting period of tensions, termed the Cuban Missile Crisis, nearly resulted in the breakout of a global thermonuclear conflict. He also signed the first nuclear weapons treaty in October 1963. Kennedy presided over the establishment of the Peace Corps, Alliance for Progress with Latin America, and the continuation of the Apollo program with the goal of landing a man on the Moon. He also supported the civil rights movement but was only somewhat successful in passing his New Frontier domestic policies.
On November 22, 1963, Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas. His vice president, Lyndon B. Johnson, assumed the presidency upon Kennedy's death. Lee Harvey Oswald, a former U.S. Marine, was arrested for the assassination, but he was shot and killed by Jack Ruby two days later. The FBI and the Warren Commission both concluded Oswald had acted alone, but conspiracy theories about the assassination still persist. After Kennedy's death, Congress enacted many of his proposals, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Revenue Act of 1964. Kennedy ranks highly in polls of U.S. presidents with historians and the general public. His personal life has also been the focus of considerable sustained interest following public revelations in the 1970s of his chronic health ailments and extramarital affairs. Kennedy is the most recent U.S. president to have died in office.
Early life and education
 Kennedy's birthplace in Brookline, Massachusetts
John Fitzgerald (Jack) Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts on May 29, 1917, at 83 Beals Street,[3] to Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., a businessman and politician, and Rose Kennedy (n e Fitzgerald), a philanthropist and socialite.[3] His paternal grandfather, P. J. Kennedy, served as a Massachusetts state legislator. Kennedy's maternal grandfather and namesake John F. Fitzgerald served as a U.S. Congressman and was elected to two terms as Mayor of Boston. All four of his grandparents were children of Irish immigrants.[1] Kennedy had an older brother, Joseph Jr., and seven younger siblings: Rosemary, Kathleen, Eunice, Patricia, Robert, Jean, and Edward.
 Kennedy in a football uniform at Dexter School (Massachusetts), 1926
Kennedy lived in Brookline for the first ten years of his life. He attended the local St. Aidan's Church, where he was baptized on June 19, 1917.[4][5] He was educated through the 4th grade at the Edward Devotion School, the Noble and Greenough Lower School, and the Dexter School; all located in the Boston area. His earliest memories involved accompanying his grandfather Fitzgerald on walking tours of historic sites in Boston and discussions at the family dinner table about politics, sparking his interest in history and public service.[6][7][8] His father's business had kept him away from the family for long stretches of time, and his ventures were concentrated on Wall Street and Hollywood. In 1927, the Dexter School announced it would not reopen before October after an outbreak of polio in Massachusetts.[9] In September, the family decided to move from Boston by "private railway car" to the Riverdale neighborhood of New York City.[10][11] Several years later, his brother Robert told Look magazine that his father had left Boston because of job signs that read: "No Irish Need Apply."[12] The family spent summers and early autumns at their home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, a village on Cape Cod, where they enjoyed swimming, sailing, and touch football.[13] Christmas and Easter holidays were spent at their winter retreat in Palm Beach, Florida.[14][15] Young John attended the Riverdale Country School   a private school for boys   from 5th to 7th grade, and was a member of Boy Scout Troop 2 in Bronxville, New York.[1][16] In September 1930, Kennedy, then 13 years old, was shipped off to the Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut, for 8th grade. In April 1931, he had an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home.[17]
In September 1931, Kennedy started attending Choate School, a prestigious preparatory boarding school in Wallingford, Connecticut. His older brother Joe Jr. was already at Choate for two years and was a football player and leading student. Jack spent his first years at Choate in his older brother's shadow and compensated with rebellious behavior that attracted a clique. Their most notorious stunt was exploding a toilet seat with a powerful firecracker. In the next chapel assembly, the headmaster, George St. John, brandished the toilet seat and spoke of certain "muckers" who would "spit in our sea", leading Kennedy to name his group "The Muckers Club", which included roommate and lifelong friend Lem Billings.[18]
 The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, with JFK at top left in the white shirt, 1931
During his years at Choate, Kennedy was beset by health problems that culminated with his emergency hospitalization in 1934 at Yale New Haven Hospital, where doctors suspected leukemia.[19] In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota; the ultimate diagnosis there was colitis.[19] Kennedy graduated from Choate in June of the following year, finishing 64th in a class of 112 students.[11] He had been the business manager of the school yearbook and was voted the "most likely to succeed".[18]
In September 1935, Kennedy made his first trip abroad when he traveled to London with his parents and his sister Kathleen. He intended to study under Harold Laski at the London School of Economics (LSE), as his older brother had done. Ill-health forced his return to the United States in October of that year, when he enrolled late and attended Princeton University but had to leave after two months due to a gastrointestinal illness.[20] He was then hospitalized for observation at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston. He convalesced further at the family winter home in Palm Beach, then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand on the 40,000-acre (16,000-hectare) Jay Six cattle ranch outside Benson, Arizona.[21] It is reported that ranchman Jack Speiden worked both brothers (Joe Jr. and John), "very hard".[22][23]
In September 1936, Kennedy enrolled at Harvard College, and his application essay stated: "The reasons that I have for wishing to go to Harvard are several. I feel that Harvard can give me a better background and a better liberal education than any other university. I have always wanted to go there, as I have felt that it is not just another college, but is a university with something definite to offer. Then too, I would like to go to the same college as my father. To be a 'Harvard man' is an enviable distinction, and one that I sincerely hope I shall attain."[24] He produced that year's annual "Freshman Smoker", called by a reviewer "an elaborate entertainment, which included in its cast outstanding personalities of the radio, screen and sports world".[25]
He tried out for the football, golf, and swimming teams and earned a spot on the varsity swimming team.[26] Kennedy also sailed in the Star class and won the 1936 Nantucket Sound Star Championship.[27] In July 1937, Kennedy sailed to France taking his convertible and spent ten weeks driving through Europe with Billings.[28] In June 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas with his father and older brother to work at the American embassy in London, where his father was President Franklin D. Roosevelt's U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. James's.[29]
In 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis. He then went to Berlin, where the U.S. diplomatic representative gave him a secret message about war breaking out soon to pass on to his father, and to Czechoslovakia before returning to London on September 1, 1939, the day that Germany invaded Poland to mark the beginning of World War II.[30] Two days later, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdom's declaration of war on Germany. Kennedy was sent as his father's representative to help with arrangements for American survivors of SS Athenia before flying back to the U.S. from Foynes, Ireland, on his first transatlantic flight.
While Kennedy was an upperclassman at Harvard, he began to take his studies more seriously and developed an interest in political philosophy. He made the dean's list in his junior year.[31] In 1940 Kennedy completed his thesis, "Appeasement in Munich", about British negotiations during the Munich Agreement. The thesis eventually became a bestseller under the title Why England Slept.[32] In addition to addressing Britain's unwillingness to strengthen its military in the lead-up to World War II, the book also called for an Anglo-American alliance against the rising totalitarian powers. Kennedy became increasingly supportive of U.S. intervention in World War II, and his father's isolationist beliefs resulted in the latter's dismissal as ambassador to the United Kingdom. This created a split between the Kennedy and Roosevelt families.[33]
In 1940, Kennedy graduated cum laude from Harvard with a Bachelor of Arts in government, concentrating on international affairs. That fall, he enrolled at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and audited classes there.[34] In early 1941, Kennedy left and helped his father write a memoir of his time as an American ambassador. He then traveled throughout South America; his itinerary included Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.[35][36]
U.S. Naval Reserve (1941 1945)
Kennedy planned to attend Yale Law School after auditing courses on business law at Stanford, but canceled when American entry into World War II seemed imminent.[37] In 1940, Kennedy attempted to enter the army's Officer Candidate School. Despite months of training, he was medically disqualified due to his chronic lower back problems. On September 24, 1941, Kennedy, with the help of the director of the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) and the former naval attach  to Joseph Kennedy, Alan Kirk, joined the United States Naval Reserve. He was commissioned an ensign on October 26, 1941,[38] and joined the staff of the Office of Naval Intelligence in Washington, D.C.[39][40][41]
 Lieutenant (junior grade) Kennedy (standing at right) with his PT-109 crew, 1943
In January 1942, Kennedy was assigned to the ONI field office at Headquarters, Sixth Naval District, in Charleston, South Carolina.[40] He attended the Naval Reserve Officer Training School at Northwestern University in Chicago from July 27 to September 27[39] and then voluntarily entered the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center in Melville, Rhode Island.[40][42] On October 10, he was promoted to lieutenant junior grade.[40] In early November, Kennedy was still mourning the death of his close, childhood friend, Marine Corps Second Lieutenant George Houk Mead Jr., who had been killed in action at Guadalcanal that August and awarded the Navy Cross for his bravery. Accompanied by a female acquaintance from a wealthy Newport family, the couple had stopped in Middletown, Rhode Island at the cemetery where the decorated, naval spy, Commander Hugo W. Koehler, USN, had been buried the previous year. Ambling around the plots near the tiny St. Columba's chapel, Kennedy paused over Koehler's white granite cross grave marker and pondered his own mortality, hoping out loud that when his time came, he would not have to die without religion. "But these things can't be faked," he added. "There's no bluffing."[43] Two decades later, Kennedy and Koehler's stepson, U.S. Senator Claiborne Pell had become good friends and political allies, although they had been acquaintances since the mid-1930s during their "salad days" on the same Newport debutante party "circuit" and when Pell had dated Kathleen ("Kick") Kennedy.[44] Kennedy completed his training on December 2 and was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron FOUR.[39]
His first command was PT-101 from December 7, 1942, until February 23, 1943:[40] It was a patrol torpedo (PT) boat used for training while Kennedy was an instructor at Melville.[45] He then led three Huckins PT boats PT-98, PT-99, and PT-101, which were being relocated from MTBRON 4 in Melville, Rhode Island, back to Jacksonville, Florida, and the new MTBRON 14 (formed February 17, 1943). During the trip south, he was hospitalized briefly in Jacksonville after diving into the cold water to unfoul a propeller. Thereafter, Kennedy was assigned duty in Panama and later in the Pacific theater, where he eventually commanded two more PT boats.[46]
Commanding PT-109
 Kennedy on his navy patrol boat, the PT-109, 1943
In April 1943, Kennedy was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron TWO,[39] and on April 24 he took command of PT-109,[47] which was based at the time on Tulagi Island in the Solomons.[40] On the night of August 1 2, in support of the New Georgia campaign, PT-109 was on its 31st mission with fourteen other PTs ordered to block or repel four Japanese destroyers and floatplanes carrying food, supplies, and 900 Japanese soldiers to the Vila Plantation garrison on the southern tip of the Solomon's Kolombangara Island. Intelligence had been sent to Kennedy's Commander Thomas G. Warfield expecting the arrival of the large Japanese naval force that would pass on the evening of August 1. Of the 24 torpedoes fired that night by eight of the American PTs, not one hit the Japanese convoy.[48] On that dark and moonless night, Kennedy spotted a Japanese destroyer heading north on its return from the base of Kolombangara around 2:00 a.m., and attempted to turn to attack, when PT-109 was rammed suddenly at an angle and cut in half by the destroyer Amagiri, killing two PT-109 crew members.[49][50][40][a]
Kennedy gathered around the wreckage his surviving ten crew members to vote on whether to "fight or surrender". Kennedy stated: "There's nothing in the book about a situation like this. A lot of you men have families and some of you have children. What do you want to do? I have nothing to lose." Shunning surrender, around 2:00 p.m. on August 2, the men swam towards Plum Pudding Island 3.5 miles (5.6 km) southwest of the remains of PT-109.[40][52] Despite re-injuring his back in the collision, Kennedy towed a badly burned crewman through the water to the island with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth.[53] Kennedy made an additional two-mile swim the night of August 2, 1943, to Ferguson Passage to attempt to hail a passing American PT boat to expedite his crew's rescue and attempted to make the trip on a subsequent night, in a damaged canoe found on Naru Island where he had swum with Ensign George Ross to look for food.[54]
On August 4, 1943, he and his executive officer, Ensign Lenny Thom, assisted his injured and hungry crew on a demanding swim 3.75 miles (6.04 km) southeast to Olasana Island, which was visible from Plum Pudding Island. They swam against a strong current, and once again Kennedy towed the badly burned motor machinist "Pappy" MacMahon by his life vest. The somewhat larger Olasana Island had ripe coconut trees, but still no fresh water.[55] On the following day, August 5, Kennedy and Ensign George Ross made the one-hour swim to Naru Island, an additional distance of about 0.5 miles (0.8 km) southwest, in search of help and food. Kennedy and Ross found a small canoe, packages of crackers, candy and a fifty-gallon drum of drinkable water left by the Japanese, which Kennedy paddled another half mile back to Olasana in the acquired canoe to provide his hungry crew.  Native coast watchers Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana first discovered the 109 crew on Olasana Island and paddled their messages to Ben Kevu, a Senior Scout who sent them on to coast watcher Lieutenant Reginald Evans. On the morning of August 7, Evans radioed the PT base on Rendova.   Lieutenant "Bud" Liebenow, a friend and former tentmate of Kennedy's, rescued Kennedy and his crew on Olasana Island on August 8, 1943, aboard his boat, PT-157.[56][57][58][59]
Commanding PT-59
After a month's recovery Kennedy returned to duty, commanding the PT-59. He and his crew removed the original torpedo tubes and depth charges and refitted the vessel into a heavily armed gunboat, mounting two automatic 40mm guns and ten .50 caliber Browning machine guns. The new plan involved attaching a gunboat to each PT boat section, adding gun range and defensive power against barges and shore batteries which the 59 went on to encounter on several occasions from mid-October to mid-November.[60] On October 8, 1943, Kennedy was promoted to full lieutenant.[61] On November 2, Kennedy's PT-59 took part with two other PTs in the successful rescue of 40 50 marines. The 59 acted as a shield from shore fire and protected them as they escaped on two rescue landing craft at the base of the Warrior River at Choiseul Island, taking ten marines aboard and delivering them to safety.[62][63] Under doctor's orders, Kennedy was relieved of his command of PT-59 on November 18, and sent to the hospital on Tulagi.[64] From there he returned to the United States in early January 1944. After receiving treatment for his back injury, he was released from active duty in late 1944.[65]
Kennedy was hospitalized at the Chelsea Naval Hospital in Chelsea, Massachusetts from May to December 1944.[39] On June 12, he was presented the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his heroic actions on August 1 2, 1943, and the Purple Heart Medal for his back injury while on PT-109.[66] Beginning in January 1945, Kennedy spent three more months recovering from his back injury at Castle Hot Springs, a resort and temporary military hospital in Arizona.[67][68] After the war, Kennedy felt that the medal he had received for heroism was not a combat award and asked that he be reconsidered for the Silver Star Medal for which he had been recommended initially. Kennedy's father also requested that his son receive the Silver Star, which is awarded for gallantry in action.
On August 12, 1944, Kennedy's older brother, Joe Jr., a navy pilot, was killed while on a special and hazardous air mission for which he had volunteered; his explosive-laden plane blew up when its bombs detonated prematurely over the English Channel.[69]
On March 1, 1945, Kennedy retired from the Navy Reserve on physical disability and was honorably discharged with the full rank of lieutenant.[66] When later asked how he became a war hero, Kennedy joked: "It was easy. They cut my PT boat in half."[70]
In 1950, the Department of the Navy offered Kennedy a Bronze Star Medal in recognition of his meritorious service, which he declined.[71] Kennedy's two original medals are currently on display at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.[72]
Military awards
In addition to the various campaign medals received for his war service, Kennedy was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his conduct during and after the loss of PT-109, as well as the Purple Heart for being wounded.[1]
Navy and Marine Corps Medal
Purple Heart
American Defense Service Medal
American Campaign Medal
Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medalwith three stars
World War II Victory Medal
Navy and Marine Corps Medal citation
For extremely heroic conduct as Commanding Officer of Motor Torpedo Boat 109 following the collision and sinking of that vessel in the Pacific War area on August 1 2, 1943. Unmindful of personal danger, Lieutenant (then Lieutenant, Junior Grade) Kennedy unhesitatingly braved the difficulties and hazards of darkness to direct rescue operations, swimming many hours to secure aid and food after he had succeeded in getting his crew ashore. His outstanding courage, endurance and leadership contributed to the saving of several lives and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service. James Forrestal, Secretary of the Navy[73]
Journalism
In April 1945, Kennedy's father, who was a friend of William Randolph Hearst, arranged a position for his son as a special correspondent for Hearst Newspapers; the assignment kept Kennedy's name in the public eye and "expose[d] him to journalism as a possible career".[74] He worked as a correspondent that May and went to Berlin for a second time,[30] covering the Potsdam Conference and other events.[75]
Congressional career (1947 1960)
JFK's elder brother Joe had been the family's political standard-bearer and had been tapped by their father to seek the presidency. Joe's death during the war in 1944 changed that course and the assignment fell to JFK as the second eldest of the Kennedy siblings.[76]
House of Representatives (1947 1953)
At the urging of Kennedy's father, U.S. Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strongly Democratic 11th congressional district of Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston in 1946. Kennedy established his residency at an apartment building on 122 Bowdoin Street across from the Massachusetts State House.[77] With his father financing and running his campaign under the slogan "The New Generation Offers a Leader",[78] Kennedy won the Democratic primary with 42 percent of the vote, defeating ten other candidates.[79] His father joked after the campaign, "With the money I spent, I could have elected my chauffeur."[80] Campaigning around Boston, Kennedy called for better housing for veterans, better health care for all, and support for organized labor's campaign for reasonable work hours, a healthy workplace, and the right to organize, bargain, and strike. In addition, he campaigned for peace through the United Nations and strong opposition to the Soviet Union.[81] Though Republicans took control of the House in the 1946 elections, Kennedy defeated his Republican opponent in the general election, taking 73 percent of the vote. Along with Richard Nixon and Joseph McCarthy, Kennedy was one of several World War II veterans elected to Congress that year.[82]
Kennedy served in the House for six years, joining the influential Education and Labor Committee and the Veterans' Affairs Committee. He concentrated his attention on international affairs, supporting the Truman Doctrine as the appropriate response to the emerging Cold War. He also supported public housing and opposed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, which restricted the power of labor unions. Though not as vocal an anti-communist as McCarthy, Kennedy supported the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, which required communists to register with the government, and he deplored the "loss of China".[83]
Having served as a boy scout during his childhood, Kennedy was active in the Boston Council from 1946 to 1955 as district vice chairman, member of the executive board, vice-president, and National Council Representative.[84][85] Almost every weekend that Congress was in session, Kennedy would fly back to Massachusetts to give speeches to veteran, fraternal, and civic groups, while maintaining an index card file on individuals who might be helpful for a future campaign for state-wide office.[86] JFK set a goal of speaking in every city and town in Massachusetts prior to 1952.[81]
Senate (1953 1960)
See also: 1952 United States Senate election in Massachusetts and 1958 United States Senate election in Massachusetts
As early as 1949, Kennedy began preparing to run for the Senate in 1952 against Republican three-term incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. with the campaign slogan "KENNEDY WILL DO MORE FOR MASSACHUSETTS".[87] Joseph Kennedy again financed his son's candidacy, while John Kennedy's younger brother Robert F. Kennedy emerged as an important member of the campaign as manager.[88] The campaign hosted a series of "teas" (sponsored by Kennedy's mother and sisters) at hotels and parlors across Massachusetts to reach out to women voters.[89][90] In the presidential election, Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower carried Massachusetts by a margin of 208,000 votes, but Kennedy defeated Lodge by 70,000 votes for the Senate seat.[91] The following year, he married Jacqueline Bouvier.[92]
Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the next two years. Often absent from the Senate, he was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites. During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage, a book about U.S. senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs, for which he won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957.[93] Rumors that this work was co-written by his close adviser and speechwriter, Ted Sorensen, were confirmed in Sorensen's 2008 autobiography.[94]
 Kennedy endorsing Adlai Stevenson II for the presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention in Chicago
At the start of his first term, Kennedy focused on Massachusetts-specific issues by sponsoring bills to help the fishing, textile manufacturing, and watchmaking industries.[95] In 1954, Senator Kennedy voted in favor of the Saint Lawrence Seaway which would connect the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean, despite opposition from Massachusetts politicians who argued that the project would cripple New England's shipping industry, including the Port of Boston.[96] Three years later, Kennedy chaired a special committee to select the five greatest U.S. senators in history so their portraits could decorate the Senate Reception Room.[97] That same year, Kennedy joined the Senate Labor Rackets Committee with his brother Robert (who was chief counsel) to investigate crime infiltration of labor unions.[98] In 1958, Kennedy introduced a bill (S. 3974) which became the first major labor relations bill to pass either house since the Taft Hartley Act of 1947. The bill dealt largely with the control of union abuses exposed by the McClellan committee but did not incorporate tough Taft Hartley amendments requested by President Eisenhower. It survived Senate floor attempts to include Taft-Hartley amendments and gained passage but was rejected by the House.[99]
At the 1956 Democratic National Convention, Kennedy gave the nominating speech for the party's presidential nominee, Adlai Stevenson II.[100] Stevenson let the convention select the vice presidential nominee. Kennedy finished second in the balloting, losing to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee but receiving national exposure as a result.[101]
 Results of the 1958 U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts by municipality. Kennedy's margin of victory of 874,608 votes was the largest in Massachusetts political history.[102][103]
A matter demanding Kennedy's attention in the Senate was President Eisenhower's bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957.[104] Kennedy cast a procedural vote against it and this was considered by some to be an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill.[104] Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin, but Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure.[105] Kennedy also voted for Title IV, termed the "Jury Trial Amendment". Many civil rights advocates at the time criticized that vote as one which would weaken the act.[106] A final compromise bill, which Kennedy supported, was passed in September 1957.[107] He proposed on July 2, 1957, that the U.S. support Algeria's effort to gain independence from France.[108] The following year, Kennedy authored A Nation of Immigrants (later published in 1964), which analyzed the importance of immigration in the country's history as well as proposals to re-evaluate immigration law.[109]
In 1958, Kennedy was re-elected to a second term in the Senate, defeating Republican opponent, Boston lawyer Vincent J. Celeste, by a margin of 874,608 votes, the largest margin in the history of Massachusetts politics.[91] It was during his re-election campaign that Kennedy's press secretary at the time, Robert E. Thompson, put together a film entitled The U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy Story, which exhibited a day in the life of the Senator and showcased his family life as well as the inner workings of his office to solve Massachusetts-related issues. It was the most comprehensive film produced about Kennedy up to that time.[110] In the aftermath of his re-election, Kennedy began preparing to run for president by traveling throughout the U.S. with the aim of building his candidacy for 1960.[111][98]
When it came to conservation, Kennedy, a Massachusetts Audubon Society supporter, wanted to make sure that the shorelines of Cape Cod remained unsullied by future industrialization. On September 3, 1959, Kennedy cosponsored the Cape Cod National Seashore bill with his Republican colleague Senator Leverett Saltonstall.[112]
Kennedy's father was a strong supporter and friend of Senator Joseph McCarthy. Additionally, Bobby Kennedy worked for McCarthy's subcommittee, and McCarthy dated Kennedy's sister Patricia. Kennedy told historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., "Hell, half my voters [particularly Catholics] in Massachusetts look on McCarthy as a hero."[113][114] In 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy, and Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure. However, it was not delivered because Kennedy was hospitalized at the time. The speech put Kennedy in the apparent position of participating by "pairing" his vote against that of another senator and opposing the censure. Although Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted, the episode damaged his support among members of the liberal community, including Eleanor Roosevelt, in the 1956 and 1960 elections.[115]
1960 presidential election
Main articles: John F. Kennedy 1960 presidential campaign, 1960 Democratic Party presidential primaries, and 1960 United States presidential election
A television advertisement from the 1960 campaign1960 campaign poster
On December 17, 1959, a letter from Kennedy's staff which was to be sent to "active and influential Democrats" was leaked stating that he would announce his presidential campaign on January 2, 1960.[116] On January 2, 1960, Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination. Though some questioned Kennedy's age and experience, his charisma and eloquence earned him numerous supporters. Many Americans held anti-Catholic attitudes, but Kennedy's vocal support of the separation of church and state helped defuse the situation. His religion also helped him win a devoted following among many Catholic voters. Kennedy faced several potential challengers for the Democratic nomination, including Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson, Adlai Stevenson II, and Senator Hubert Humphrey.[117]
Kennedy's presidential campaign was a family affair, funded by his father and with his younger brother Robert, acting as his campaign manager. John preferred Ivy League policy advisors, but unlike his father, he enjoyed the give and take of Massachusetts politics and built a largely Irish team of campaigners, headed by Larry O'Brien and Kenneth O'Donnell. Kennedy traveled extensively to build his support among Democratic elites and voters. At the time, party officials controlled most of the delegates, but several states also held primaries, and Kennedy sought to win several primaries to boost his chances of winning the nomination. In his first major test, Kennedy won the Wisconsin primary, effectively ending Humphrey's hopes of winning the presidency. Nonetheless, Kennedy and Humphrey faced each other in a competitive West Virginia primary in which Kennedy could not benefit from a Catholic bloc, as he had in Wisconsin. Kennedy won the West Virginia primary, impressing many in the party, but at the start of the 1960 Democratic National Convention, it was unclear as to whether he would win the nomination.[117]
When Kennedy entered the convention, he had the most delegates, but not enough to ensure that he would win the nomination. Stevenson the 1952 and 1956 presidential nominee remained very popular in the party, while Johnson also hoped to win the nomination with the support from party leaders. Kennedy's candidacy also faced opposition from former president Harry S. Truman, who was concerned about Kennedy's lack of experience. Kennedy knew that a second ballot could give the nomination to Johnson or someone else, and his well-organized campaign was able to earn the support of just enough delegates to win the presidential nomination on the first ballot.[118]
 Kennedy and Richard Nixon participate in the nation's second televised presidential debate, Washington, D.C., 1960.
Kennedy ignored the opposition of his brother, who wanted him to choose labor leader Walter Reuther,[119] and other liberal supporters when he chose Johnson as his vice presidential nominee. He believed that the Texas Senator could help him win support from the South.[120] The choice infuriated many in labor. AFL-CIO President George Meany called Johnson "the arch foe of labor", while Illinois AFL-CIO President Reuben Soderstrom asserted Kennedy had "made chumps out of leaders of the American labor movement."[121][122] In accepting the presidential nomination, Kennedy gave his well-known "New Frontier" speech, saying, "For the problems are not all solved and the battles are not all won and we stand today on the edge of a New Frontier. ... But the New Frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises it is a set of challenges. It sums up not what I intend to offer the American people, but what I intend to ask of them."[123]
At the start of the fall general election campaign, the Republican nominee and incumbent vice president Richard Nixon held a six-point lead in the polls.[124] Major issues included how to get the economy moving again, Kennedy's Roman Catholicism, the Cuban Revolution, and whether the space and missile programs of the Soviet Union had surpassed those of the U.S. To address fears that his being Catholic would impact his decision-making, he told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12, 1960: "I am not the Catholic candidate for president. I am the Democratic Party candidate for president who also happens to be a Catholic. I do not speak for my Church on public matters and the Church does not speak for me."[125] Kennedy questioned rhetorically whether one-quarter of Americans were relegated to second-class citizenship just because they were Catholic, and once stated that "[n]o one asked me my religion [serving the Navy] in the South Pacific".[126] Despite Kennedy's efforts to quell anti-Catholic concerns and similar statements by high-profile Protestant figures, religious bigotry would dog the Democratic candidate through the end of the campaign. His score among white Protestants would ultimately be lower than Adlai Stevenson's in 1956, though Stevenson lost his election. Some Catholic leaders also expressed reservations about Kennedy, but the vast majority of laypeople rallied to him.[127][128][129]
 Kennedy casting his ballot at the Boston Public Library on Election Day
Nixon attended the first of these debates after a day of campaigning, whilst running a fever and having previously suffered an infected leg injury earlier in the campaign. During the debate Nixon looked at the reporters asking questions and not at the camera, and was perspirating which his makeup accentuated. He wore a tan suit which reduced his presence against the set background and his fast-growing facial hair was visible as "five o'clock shadow". In contrast, Kennedy had spent the preceding days on debate preparation, appeared relaxed and looked into the camera whilst answering questions.[130] It is commonly said that Kennedy appearing to be the more attractive man of the two won him the debate, largely because of a poll in which voters who watched on TV thought that Kennedy had won but radio listeners believed Nixon to have won.[131] However, only one poll split TV and radio voters like this and the methodology of the pollsters was poor, failing to account for pre-debate political or religious biases and only interviewing 178 radio listeners who believed the debate had been won by either candidate.[131] The location of the polling is also unknown, even though Nixon would have been more popular pre-debate anyway in Protestant, rural areas with less access to television. 1960 was a close race and there is no polling available consistent with the idea that Nixon lost or Kennedy gained support as a result of the debate.[131]  Vancil and Pendell point out that Nixon did not win the debate by strength of argument either; Democratic figures were satisfied with Kennedy's debate performance and even many Southern Democrats who had been apathetic or hostile towards Kennedy were impressed, but Nixon's performance alarmed Republican figures who thought that his defensiveness and me-tooism (repeatedly emphasising his agreement with Kennedy) realised their worst fears and was a surprisingly poor performance from him.[132] The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role in politics.[93]
Kennedy's campaign gained momentum after the first debate, and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls. On Election Day, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century. In the national popular vote, by most accounts, Kennedy led Nixon by just two-tenths of one percent (49.7% to 49.5%), while in the Electoral College, he won 303 votes to Nixon's 219 (269 were needed to win).[133] Fourteen electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement; they voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia, as did an elector from Oklahoma.[133] Forty-three years old, Kennedy was the youngest person ever elected to the presidency (though Theodore Roosevelt was a year younger when, as vice-president, he succeeded to the presidency after the assassination of William McKinley in 1901).[134]
Presidency (1961 1963)
Main article: Presidency of John F. Kennedy
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the John F. Kennedy presidency.
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
John F. Kennedy's Inaugural Address
 Chief Justice Earl Warren administers the presidential oath of office to Kennedy at the Capitol, January 20, 1961.
John F. Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20, 1961. In his inaugural address, he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens: "Ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country." He asked the nations of the world to join to fight what he called the "common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself".[135] He added:
"All this will not be finished in the first one hundred days. Nor will it be finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. But let us begin." In closing, he expanded on his desire for greater internationalism: "Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you."[135]
The address reflected Kennedy's confidence that his administration would chart a historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs. The contrast between this optimistic vision and the pressures of managing daily political realities at home and abroad would be one of the main tensions running through the early years of his administration.[136]
 Kennedy with retired president Dwight D. Eisenhower at Camp David
Kennedy brought to the White House a contrast in organization compared to the decision-making structure of former General Eisenhower, and he wasted no time in scrapping Eisenhower's methods.[137] Kennedy preferred the organizational structure of a wheel with all the spokes leading to the president. He was ready and willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment. He selected a mixture of experienced and inexperienced people to serve in his cabinet. "We can learn our jobs together", he stated.[138]
Much to the chagrin of his economic advisors, who wanted him to reduce taxes, Kennedy quickly agreed to a balanced budget pledge. This was needed in exchange for votes to expand the membership of the House Rules Committee in order to give the Democrats a majority in setting the legislative agenda.[139] Kennedy focused on immediate and specific issues facing the administration and quickly voiced his impatience with pondering deeper meanings. Deputy National Security Advisor Walt Whitman Rostow once began a diatribe about the growth of communism, and Kennedy abruptly cut him off, asking, "What do you want me to do about that today?"[140]
Kennedy approved Defense Secretary Robert McNamara's controversial decision to award the contract for the F-111 TFX (Tactical Fighter Experimental) fighter-bomber to General Dynamics (the choice of the civilian Defense department) over Boeing (the choice of the military).[141] At the request of Senator Henry Jackson, Senator John McClellan held 46 days of mostly closed-door hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations investigating the TFX contract from February to November 1963.[142]
During the summer of 1962, Kennedy had a secret taping system set up in the White House, most likely to aid his future memoir. It recorded many conversations with Kennedy and his Cabinet members, including those in relation to the "Cuban Missile Crisis".[143]
Foreign policy
Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration
 Foreign trips of Kennedy during his presidency
Kennedy's foreign policy was dominated by American confrontations with the Soviet Union, manifested by proxy contests in the early stage of the Cold War. In 1961 he anxiously anticipated a summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. He started off on the wrong foot by reacting aggressively to a routine Khrushchev speech on Cold War confrontation in early 1961. The speech was intended for domestic audiences in the Soviet Union, but Kennedy interpreted it as a personal challenge. His mistake helped raise tensions going into the Vienna summit of June 1961.[144]
On the way to the summit, Kennedy stopped in Paris to meet French President Charles de Gaulle, who advised him to ignore Khrushchev's abrasive style. The French president feared the United States' presumed influence in Europe. Nevertheless, de Gaulle was quite impressed with the young president and his family. Kennedy picked up on this in his speech in Paris, saying that he would be remembered as "the man who accompanied Jackie Kennedy to Paris".[145]
 Clip of Kennedy meeting with Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna, 1961
On June 4, 1961, Kennedy met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meetings angry and disappointed that he had allowed the premier to bully him, despite the warnings he had received. Khrushchev, for his part, was impressed with the president's intelligence but thought him weak. Kennedy did succeed in conveying the bottom line to Khrushchev on the most sensitive issue before them, a proposed treaty between Moscow and East Berlin. He made it clear that any treaty interfering with U.S. access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war.[146] Shortly after Kennedy returned home, the U.S.S.R. announced its plan to sign a treaty with East Berlin, abrogating any third-party occupation rights in either sector of the city. Depressed and angry, Kennedy assumed that his only option was to prepare the country for nuclear war, which he personally thought had a one-in-five chance of occurring.[147]
In the weeks immediately following the Vienna summit, more than 20,000 people fled from East Berlin to the western sector, reacting to statements from the U.S.S.R. Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup alongside NATO allies.[148] In a July 1961 speech, Kennedy announced his decision to add $3.25 billion (equivalent to $29.47 billion in 2021) to the defense budget, along with over 200,000 additional troops, stating that an attack on West Berlin would be taken as an attack on the U.S. The speech received an 85% approval rating.[149]
A month later, both the Soviet Union and East Berlin began blocking any further passage of East Germans into West Berlin and erected barbed wire fences, which were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall, around the city. Kennedy's initial reaction was to ignore this, as long as free access from the West to West Berlin continued. This course was altered when West Berliners had lost confidence in the defense of their position by the United States. Kennedy sent Vice President Johnson and Lucius D. Clay, along with a host of military personnel, in convoy through East Germany, including Soviet-armed checkpoints, to demonstrate the continued commitment of the U.S. to West Berlin.[150][151]
Kennedy gave a speech at Saint Anselm College on May 5, 1960, regarding America's conduct in the emerging Cold War. His address detailed how he felt American foreign policy should be conducted towards African nations, noting a hint of support for modern African nationalism by saying, "For we, too, founded a new nation on revolt from colonial rule."[152]
Cuba and the Bay of Pigs Invasion
Main article: Bay of Pigs Invasion
 Kennedy and Vice President Johnson walking on the White House grounds
The Eisenhower administration had created a plan to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime in Cuba. Led by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), with help from the U.S. military, the plan was for an invasion of Cuba by a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of U.S.-trained, anti-Castro Cuban exiles[153][154] led by CIA paramilitary officers. The intention was to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people, hoping to remove Castro from power.[155] Kennedy approved the final invasion plan on April 4, 1961.
The Bay of Pigs Invasion began on April 17, 1961. Fifteen hundred U.S.-trained Cubans, dubbed Brigade 2506, landed on the island. No U.S. air support was provided. CIA director Allen Dulles later stated that they thought Kennedy would authorize any action that was needed for success once the troops were on the ground.[156]
By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles, and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors. Twenty months later, Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for $53 million worth of food and medicine.[157] The incident made Castro feel wary of the U.S. and led him to believe that another invasion would take place.[158]
Biographer Richard Reeves said that Kennedy focused primarily on the political repercussions of the plan rather than military considerations. When it proved unsuccessful, he was convinced that the plan was a setup to make him look bad.[159] He took responsibility for the failure, saying, "We got a big kick in the leg and we deserved it. But maybe we'll learn something from it."[160] He appointed Robert Kennedy to help lead a committee to examine the causes of the failure.[161]
In late-1961, the White House formed the Special Group (Augmented), headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale, Secretary Robert McNamara, and others. The group's objective to overthrow Castro via espionage, sabotage, and other covert tactics was never pursued.[162] In November 1961, he authorized Operation Mongoose.[163] In March 1962, Kennedy rejected Operation Northwoods, proposals for false flag attacks against American military and civilian targets,[164] and blaming them on the Cuban government in order to gain approval for a war against Cuba. However, the administration continued to plan for an invasion of Cuba in the summer of 1962.[163]
Cuban Missile Crisis
Main article: Cuban Missile Crisis
 Kennedy confers with Attorney General Robert Kennedy, October 1962
Address on the Buildup of Arms in Cuba
Kennedy addressing the nation on October 22, 1962, about the buildup of arms on Cuba
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Cuban Missile Crisis
On October 14, 1962, CIA U-2 spy planes took photographs of the Soviets' construction of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba. The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16; a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and thus posed an immediate nuclear threat.[165]
Kennedy faced a dilemma: if the U.S. attacked the sites, it might lead to nuclear war with the U.S.S.R., but if the U.S. did nothing, it would be faced with the increased threat from close-range nuclear weapons. The U.S. would also appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the hemisphere. On a personal level, Kennedy needed to show resolve in reaction to Khrushchev, especially after the Vienna summit.[166]
More than a third of U.S. National Security Council (NSC) members favored an unannounced air assault on the missile sites, but for some of them this conjured up an image of "Pearl Harbor in reverse".[167] There was also some concern from the international community (asked in confidence), that the assault plan was an overreaction in light of the fact that Eisenhower had placed PGM-19 Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey in 1958. It also could not be assured that the assault would be 100% effective.[168] In concurrence with a majority-vote of the NSC, Kennedy decided on a naval quarantine. On October 22, he dispatched a message to Khrushchev and announced the decision on TV.[169]
The U.S. Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24. The Organization of American States gave unanimous support to the removal of the missiles. Kennedy exchanged two sets of letters with Khrushchev, to no avail.[170] United Nations (UN) Secretary General U Thant requested both parties to reverse their decisions and enter a cooling-off period. Khrushchev agreed, but Kennedy did not.[171]
One Soviet-flagged ship was stopped and boarded. On October 28, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile sites, subject to UN inspections.[172] The U.S. publicly promised never to invade Cuba and privately agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey, which were by then obsolete and had been supplanted by submarines equipped with UGM-27 Polaris missiles.[173]
This crisis brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or after. It is considered that "the humanity" of both Khrushchev and Kennedy prevailed.[174] The crisis improved the image of American willpower and the president's credibility. Kennedy's approval rating increased from 66% to 77% immediately thereafter.[175]
Latin America and communism
Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration  Latin America
 Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba in the Oval Office, October 23, 1962.
Believing that "those who make peaceful revolution impossible, will make violent revolution inevitable,"[176][177] Kennedy sought to contain the perceived threat of communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress, which sent aid to some countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region.[178] He worked closely with Puerto Rican Governor Luis Mu oz Mar n for the development of the Alliance of Progress and began working to further Puerto Rico's autonomy.
The Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, had begun formulating plans to assassinate Castro in Cuba and Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic. When Kennedy took office, he privately instructed the CIA that any plan must include plausible deniability by the U.S. His public position was in opposition.[179] In June 1961, the Dominican Republic's leader was assassinated; in the days following, Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction by the nation. Robert Kennedy, who saw an opportunity for the U.S., called Bowles "a gutless bastard" to his face.[180]
Peace Corps
Establishment of the Peace Corps
John F. Kennedy's announcement
Problems playing this file? See media help.
In one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps. His brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver, was its first director.[181] Through this program, Americans volunteered to help developing nations in fields like education, farming, health care, and construction. The organization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 the year after.[182] Since 1961, over 200,000 Americans have joined the Peace Corps, representing 139 countries.[183][184]
Southeast Asia
Main articles: Laotian Civil War, Taylor-Rostow Report, 1963 South Vietnamese coup, Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem, Reaction to the 1963 South Vietnamese coup, Cable 243, Buddhist crisis, Th ch Qu ng  c, X  L i Pagoda raids, Krulak Mendenhall mission, and McNamara Taylor mission
As a U.S. Congressman in 1951, Kennedy became fascinated with Vietnam after visiting the area as part of a big fact-finding mission to Asia and the Middle East, even stressing in a subsequent radio address that he strongly favored "check[ing] the southern drive of communism."[185] As a U.S. senator in 1956, Kennedy publicly advocated for greater U.S. involvement in Vietnam.[186][187] When briefing Kennedy, Eisenhower emphasized that the communist threat in Southeast Asia required priority; Eisenhower considered Laos to be "the cork in the bottle" regarding the regional threat. In March 1961, Kennedy voiced a change in policy from supporting a "free" Laos to a "neutral" Laos, indicating privately that Vietnam, and not Laos, should be deemed America's tripwire for communism's spread in the area.[188] In May, he dispatched Lyndon Johnson to meet with South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem. Johnson assured Diem more aid to mold a fighting force that could resist the communists.[189] Kennedy announced a change of policy from support to partnership with Diem to defeat of communism in South Vietnam.[190]
During his presidency, Kennedy continued policies that provided political, economic, and military support to the governments of South Korea and South Vietnam.[191][192]
We have one-million Americans today serving outside the United-States. There's no other country in history that's carried this kind of a burden. Other countries have had forces serving outside their own country, but for conquest. We have two divisions in South-Korea, not to control South-Korea, but to defend it. We have a lot of Americans in South Vietnam. Well, no other country in the world has ever done that since the beginning of the world; Greece, Rome, Napoleon, and all the rest, always had conquest. We have a million men outside, and they try to defend these countries.[192]
 News conference, March 23, 1961
The Viet Cong began assuming a predominant presence in late 1961, initially seizing the provincial capital of Phuoc Vinh.[193] After a mission to Vietnam in October, presidential adviser General Maxwell D. Taylor and Deputy National Security Adviser Walt Rostow recommended the deployment of 6,000 to 8,000 U.S. combat troops to Vietnam.[194]  Kennedy increased the number of military advisers and special forces in the area, from 11,000 in 1962 to 16,000 by late 1963, but he was reluctant to order a full-scale deployment of troops.[195][196] However, Kennedy, who was wary about the region's successful war of independence against France, was also eager to not give the impression to the Vietnamese people that the United States was acting as the region's new colonizer, even stating in his journal at one point that the United States was "more and more becoming colonists in the minds of the people." A year and three months later on March 8, 1965, his successor, President Lyndon Johnson, committed the first combat troops to Vietnam and greatly escalated U.S. involvement, with forces reaching 184,000 that year and 536,000 in 1968.[197]
In late 1961, Kennedy sent Roger Hilsman, then director of the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to assess the situation in Vietnam. There, Hilsman met Sir Robert Grainger Ker Thompson, head of the British Advisory Mission to South Vietnam, and the Strategic Hamlet Program was formed. It was approved by Kennedy and South Vietnam President Ngo Dinh Diem. It was implemented in early 1962 and involved some forced relocation, village internment, and segregation of rural South Vietnamese into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from communist insurgents. It was hoped that these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and the central government. By November 1963, the program waned and officially ended in 1964.[198]
In early 1962, Kennedy formally authorized escalated involvement when he signed the National Security Action Memorandum  "Subversive Insurgency (War of Liberation)".[199] "Operation Ranch Hand", a large-scale aerial defoliation effort, began on the roadsides of South Vietnam.[200] Depending on which assessment Kennedy accepted (Department of Defense or State), there had been zero or modest progress in countering the increase in communist aggression in return for an expanded U.S. involvement.[201]
 Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, 1962
In April 1963, Kennedy assessed the situation in Vietnam, saying, "We don't have a prayer of staying in Vietnam. Those people hate us. They are going to throw our asses out of there at any point. But I can't give up that territory to the communists and get the American people to re-elect me."[202]
On August 21, just as the new U.S. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. arrived, Diem and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu ordered South Vietnam forces, funded and trained by the CIA, to quell Buddhist demonstrations. The crackdowns heightened expectations of a coup d' tat to remove Diem with (or perhaps by) his brother, Nhu.[203] Lodge was instructed to try getting Diem and Nhu to step down and leave the country. Diem would not listen to Lodge.[204] Cable 243 (DEPTEL 243) followed, dated August 24, declaring that Washington would no longer tolerate Nhu's actions, and Lodge was ordered to pressure Diem to remove Nhu.[205] Lodge concluded that the only option was to get the South Vietnamese generals to overthrow Diem and Nhu.[206] At week's end, orders were sent to Saigon and throughout Washington to "destroy all coup cables".[207] At the same time, the first formal anti-Vietnam war sentiment was expressed by U.S. clergy from the Ministers' Vietnam Committee.[208]
A White House meeting in September was indicative of the different ongoing appraisals; Kennedy received updated assessments after personal inspections on the ground by the Departments of Defense (General Victor Krulak) and State (Joseph Mendenhall). Krulak said that the military fight against the communists was progressing and being won, while Mendenhall stated that the country was civilly being lost to any U.S. influence. Kennedy reacted, asking, "Did you two gentlemen visit the same country?" Kennedy was unaware that both men were so much at odds that they did not speak to each other on the return flight.[209]
In October 1963, Kennedy appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and General Maxwell D. Taylor to a Vietnamese mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy. The objective of the McNamara Taylor mission "emphasized the importance of getting to the bottom of the differences in reporting from U.S. representatives in Vietnam".[210] In meetings with McNamara, Taylor, and Lodge, Diem again refused to agree to governing measures, helping to dispel McNamara's previous optimism about Diem.[211] Taylor and McNamara were enlightened by Vietnam's vice president, Nguyen Ngoc Tho (choice of many to succeed Diem), who in detailed terms obliterated Taylor's information that the military was succeeding in the countryside.[212] At Kennedy's insistence, the mission report contained a recommended schedule for troop withdrawals: 1,000 by year's end and complete withdrawal in 1965, something the NSC considered to be a "strategic fantasy".[213]
In late October, intelligence wires again reported that a coup against the Diem government was afoot. The source, Vietnamese General Duong Van Minh (also known as "Big Minh"), wanted to know the U.S. position. Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination.[214] On November 1, 1963, South Vietnamese generals, led by "Big Minh", overthrew the Diem government, arresting and then killing Diem and Nhu. Kennedy was shocked by the deaths.[215]
News of the coup led to renewed confidence initially both in America and in South Vietnam that the war might be won.[216] McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas. It reiterated the resolve to fight communism in Vietnam, with increasing military and economic aid and expansion of operations into Laos and Cambodia. Before leaving for Dallas, Kennedy told Michael Forrestal that "after the first of the year ... [he wanted] an in depth study of every possible option, including how to get out of there ... to review this whole thing from the bottom to the top". Asked what he thought Kennedy meant, Forrestal said, "It was devil's advocate stuff."[217]
 Kennedy delivers the commencement speech at American University, June 10, 1963.
Historians disagree on whether the Vietnam War would have escalated if Kennedy had not been assassinated and had won re-election in 1964.[218] Fueling the debate were statements made by Secretary of Defense McNamara in the film "The Fog of War" that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling the United States out of Vietnam after the 1964 election.[219] The film also contains a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson stating that Kennedy was planning to withdraw, a position in which Johnson disagreed.[220] Kennedy had signed National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) 263, dated October 11, which ordered the withdrawal of 1,000 military personnel by year's end, and the bulk of them out by 1965.[221][222] Such an action would have been a policy reversal, but Kennedy was publicly moving in a less hawkish direction since his speech on world peace at American University on June 10, 1963.[223]
At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision was made to Vietnam.[224] In 2008, Kennedy administration White House Counsel and speechwriter Ted Sorensen wrote, "I would like to believe that Kennedy would have found a way to withdraw all American instructors and advisors [from Vietnam]. But ... I do not believe he knew in his last weeks what he was going to do."[225] Sorensen added that, in his opinion, Vietnam "was the only foreign policy problem handed off by JFK to his successor in no better, and possibly worse, shape than it was when he inherited it."[225] U.S. involvement in the region escalated until his successor Lyndon Johnson directly deployed regular U.S. military forces for fighting the Vietnam War.[226][227] After Kennedy's assassination, President Johnson signed NSAM 273 on November 26, 1963. It reversed Kennedy's decision to withdraw 1,000 troops, and reaffirmed the policy of assistance to the South Vietnamese.[228][229]
American University speech
World Peace Speech
Speech from American University by John F. Kennedy, June 10, 1963 (duration 26:47)
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
A Strategy of Peace
On June 10, 1963, Kennedy, at the high point of his rhetorical powers,[230] delivered the commencement address at American University in Washington, D.C. Also known as "A Strategy of Peace", not only did Kennedy outline a plan to curb nuclear arms, but he also "laid out a hopeful, yet realistic route for world peace at a time when the U.S. and Soviet Union faced the potential for an escalating nuclear arms race."[231] Kennedy wished
to discuss a topic on which too often ignorance abounds and the truth is too rarely perceived yet it is the most important topic on earth: world peace ... I speak of peace because of the new face of war ... in an age when a singular nuclear weapon contains ten times the explosive force delivered by all the allied forces in the Second World War ... an age when the deadly poisons produced by a nuclear exchange would be carried by wind and air and soil and seed to the far corners of the globe and to generations yet unborn ... I speak of peace, therefore, as the necessary rational end of rational men ... world peace, like community peace, does not require that each man love his neighbor it requires only that they live together in mutual tolerance ... our problems are man-made therefore they can be solved by man. And man can be as big as he wants.[232]
Kennedy also made two announcements: 1.) that the Soviets had expressed a desire to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, and 2.) that the U.S. had postponed planned atmospheric tests.[233]
West Berlin speech
 Kennedy delivering his speech in West Berlin
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
JFK's Ich bin ein Berliner speech
In 1963, Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability due to Soviet aggression to the east as well as the impending retirement of West German Chancellor Adenauer.[234] At the same time, French President Charles de Gaulle was trying to build a Franco-West German counterweight to the American and Soviet spheres of influence.[235][236][237] To Kennedy's eyes, this Franco-German cooperation seemed directed against NATO's influence in Europe.[238]
To reinforce the U.S. alliance with West Germany, Kennedy travelled to West Germany and West Berlin in June 1963. On June 26, Kennedy toured West Berlin, culminating in a public speech at West Berlin's city hall in front of hundreds of thousands of enthusiastic Berliners.[239]  He reiterated the American commitment to Germany and criticized communism, and was met with an ecstatic response from a massive audience.[240] Kennedy used the construction of the Berlin Wall as an example of the failures of communism: "Freedom has many difficulties, and democracy is not perfect. But we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in, to prevent them from leaving us." The speech is known for its famous phrase "Ich bin ein Berliner" ("I am a Berliner"), which Kennedy himself had begun to try out in preparation for the trip.[241] Kennedy remarked to Ted Sorensen afterwards: "We'll never have another day like this one, as long as we live."[242]
Israel
In 1960, Kennedy stated, "Israel will endure and flourish. It is the child of hope and the home of the brave. It can neither be broken by adversity nor demoralized by success. It carries the shield of democracy and it honors the sword of freedom."[243]
As president, Kennedy initiated the creation of security ties with Israel, and he is credited as the founder of the US-Israeli military alliance, which would be continued under subsequent presidents. Kennedy ended the arms embargo that the Eisenhower and Truman administrations had enforced on Israel. Describing the protection of Israel as a moral and national commitment, he was the first to introduce the concept of a "special relationship" (as he described it to Golda Meir) between the US and Israel.[244]
 Kennedy with Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir, December 27, 1962
Kennedy extended the first informal security guarantees to Israel in 1962 and, beginning in 1963, was the first US president to allow the sale to Israel of advanced US weaponry (the MIM-23 Hawk) as well as to provide diplomatic support for Israeli policies, which were opposed by Arab neighbors; those policies included Israel's water project on the Jordan River.[245]
As a result of this newly created security alliance, Kennedy also encountered tensions with the Israeli government over the production of nuclear materials in Dimona, which he believed could instigate a nuclear arms-race in the Middle East. After the existence of a nuclear plant was initially denied by the Israeli government, David Ben-Gurion stated in a speech to the Israeli Knesset on December 21, 1960, that the purpose of the nuclear plant at Beersheba was for "research in problems of arid zones and desert flora and fauna".[246] When Ben-Gurion met with Kennedy in New York, he claimed that Dimona was being developed to provide nuclear power for desalinization and other peaceful purposes "for the time being".[246]
In 1963 the Kennedy administration was engaged in a now-declassified diplomatic standoff with the leaders of Israel.[247][248] In a May 1963 letter to Ben-Gurion, Kennedy wrote that he was skeptical and stated that American support to Israel could be in jeopardy if reliable information on the Israeli nuclear program was not forthcoming, Ben-Gurion repeated previous reassurances that Dimona was being developed for peaceful purposes. The Israeli government resisted American pressure to open its nuclear facilities to International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspections. In 1962 the US and Israeli governments had agreed to an annual inspection regime. A science attach  at the embassy in Tel Aviv concluded that parts of the Dimona facility had been shut down temporarily to mislead American scientists when they visited.[249]
According to Seymour Hersh, the Israelis set up false control rooms to show the Americans. Israeli lobbyist Abe Feinberg stated: "It was part of my job to tip them off that Kennedy was insisting on [an inspection]."[249] Hersh contends that the inspections were conducted in such a way that it "guaranteed that the whole procedure would be little more than a whitewash, as the president and his senior advisors had to understand: the American inspection team would have to schedule its visits well in advance, and with the full acquiescence of Israel."[250] Marc Trachtenberg argued that "[a]lthough [he was] well aware of what the Israelis were doing, Kennedy chose to take this as satisfactory evidence of Israeli compliance with America's non-proliferation policy."[251] The documents reveal the deep concern the Kennedy Administration had over Dimona, and while Kennedy understood the United States and the international community may not be capable of preventing Israel or any nation, he certainly was not satisfied to learn Israel was using Dimona for the production of plutonium.[252] The American who led the inspection team stated that the essential goal of the inspections was to find "ways to not reach the point of taking action against Israel's nuclear weapons program".[253]
Rodger Davies, the director of the State Department's Office of Near Eastern Affairs, concluded in March 1965 that Israel was developing nuclear weapons. He reported that Israel's target date for achieving nuclear capability was 1968 1969.[254] On May 1, 1968, Undersecretary of State Nicholas Katzenbach told President Johnson that Dimona was producing enough plutonium to produce two bombs a year. The State Department argued that if Israel wanted arms, it should accept international supervision of its nuclear program.[249] Dimona was never placed under IAEA safeguards. Attempts to write Israeli adherence to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) into contracts for the supply of U.S. weapons continued throughout 1968.[255]
Israeli national interests to an extent were also at odds with Kennedy's endorsement of the United Nation's Johnson Plan, which devised a plan to return a small percentage of displaced Palestinians from the war of 1948 into what was by then, Israel. This continuation of the late UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold's plan for Palestinian repatriation particularity disturbed persons who had a hard line view of even Arab resettlement in Israel, or the more heavily feared, full repatriation. The Johnson plan was spearheaded by the Palestine Conciliation Commission's Dr. Joseph Ersey Johnson, while the United Nations attempted to oversee progression from writing - into action.
[256][257]
Iraq
Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration  Iraq
 Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran, Kennedy, and U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in the White House Cabinet Room on April 13, 1962
Relations between the United States and Iraq became strained following the overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy on July 14, 1958, which resulted in the declaration of a republican government led by Brigadier Abd al-Karim Qasim.[258] On June 25, 1961, Qasim mobilized troops along the border between Iraq and Kuwait, declaring the latter nation "an indivisible part of Iraq" and causing a short-lived "Kuwait Crisis". The United Kingdom which had just granted Kuwait independence on June 19, and whose economy was dependent on Kuwaiti oil responded on July 1 by dispatching 5,000 troops to the country to deter an Iraqi invasion. At the same time, Kennedy dispatched a U.S. Navy task force to Bahrain, and the UK, at the urging of the Kennedy administration, brought the dispute to United Nations Security Council, where the proposed resolution was vetoed by the Soviet Union. The situation was resolved in October, when the British troops were withdrawn and replaced by a 4,000-strong Arab League force, which acted as a barrier against the Iraqi threat.[259]
In December 1961, Qasim's government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the partially American-controlled Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC)'s concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced, effectively expropriating 99.5% of the IPC concession. U.S. officials were alarmed by the expropriation as well as the recent Soviet veto of an Egyptian-sponsored UN resolution requesting the admittance of Kuwait as UN member state, which they believed were connected. Senior National Security Council adviser Robert Komer worried that if the IPC ceased production in response, Qasim might "grab Kuwait" (thus achieving a "stranglehold" on Middle Eastern oil production) or "throw himself into Russian arms". Komer also made note of widespread rumors that a nationalist coup against Qasim could be imminent, and had the potential to "get Iraq back on [a] more neutral keel".[260]
In April 1962, the State Department issued new guidelines on Iraq that were intended to increase American influence there. Meanwhile, Kennedy instructed the CIA under the direction of Archibald Bulloch Roosevelt Jr. to begin making preparations for a military coup against Qasim.[261]
The anti-imperialist and anti-communist Iraqi Ba'ath Party overthrew and executed Qasim in a violent coup on February 8, 1963. While there have been persistent rumors that the CIA orchestrated the coup, declassified documents and the testimony of former CIA officers indicate that there was no direct American involvement, although the CIA was actively seeking a suitable replacement for Qasim within the Iraqi military and had been informed of an earlier Ba'athist coup plot.[262] The Kennedy administration was pleased with the outcome and ultimately approved a $55-million arms deal for Iraq.[263]
Ireland
 Kennedy's motorcade through Cork, Ireland on June 28, 1963
During his four-day visit to his ancestral home of Ireland beginning on June 26, 1963,[264] Kennedy accepted a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland, received honorary degrees from the National University of Ireland and Trinity College Dublin, attended a State Dinner in Dublin, and was conferred with the freedom of the towns and cities of Wexford, Cork, Dublin, Galway, and Limerick.[265][266] He visited the cottage at Dunganstown, near New Ross, County Wexford, where his ancestors had lived before emigrating to America.[267]
Kennedy also was the first foreign leader to address the Houses of the Oireachtas, the Irish parliament.[266][268][269][270]
Kennedy later told aides that the trip was the best four days of his life.[271]
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Main article: Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
 Kennedy signs the Partial Test Ban Treaty, a major milestone in early nuclear disarmament.
Troubled by the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear weapons proliferation, Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, originally conceived in Adlai Stevenson's 1956 presidential campaign.[272] In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy both reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September. In response, the United States conducted tests five days later.[273] Shortly afterwards, new U.S. satellites began delivering images that made it clear that the Soviets were substantially behind the U.S. in the arms race.[274] Nevertheless, the greater nuclear strength of the U.S. was of little value as long as the U.S.S.R. perceived itself to be at parity.[275]
In July 1963, Kennedy sent W. Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets.[276] The introductory sessions included Khrushchev, who later delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko. It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections that would verify compliance.[277]
Ultimately, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty, which prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground. The U.S. Senate ratified this and Kennedy signed it into law in October 1963. France was quick to declare that it was free to continue developing and testing its nuclear defenses.[278]
Domestic policy
See also: New Frontier
Kennedy called his domestic program the "New Frontier". It ambitiously promised federal funding for education, medical care for the elderly, economic aid to rural regions, and government intervention to halt the recession. He also promised an end to racial discrimination,[279] although his agenda, which included the endorsement of the Voter Education Project (VEP) in 1962, produced little progress in areas such as Mississippi, where the "VEP concluded that discrimination was so entrenched".[280][281]
In his 1963 State of the Union address, he proposed substantial tax reform and a reduction in income tax rates from the current range of 20 90% to a range of 14 65% as well as a reduction in the corporate tax rates from 52 to 47%. Kennedy added that the top rate should be set at 70% if certain deductions were not eliminated for high-income earners.[279] Congress did not act until 1964, a year after his death, when the top individual rate was lowered to 70%, and the top corporate rate was set at 48%.[282]
To the Economic Club of New York, he spoke in 1963 of "... the paradoxical truth that tax rates are too high and revenues too low; and the soundest way to raise revenue in the long term is to lower rates now."[283] Congress passed few of Kennedy's major programs during his lifetime, but did vote them through in 1964 and 1965 under his successor Johnson.[284]
Economy
See also: Recession of 1960 1961 and Kennedy Slide of 1962
 Kennedy signing the Manpower Development and Training Act, March 1962
Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and to encourage growth of the economy.[285] He presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962, and his first budget in 1961 resulted in the nation's first non-war, non-recession deficit.[286] The economy, which had been through two recessions in three years and was in one when Kennedy took office, accelerated notably throughout his administration. Despite low inflation and interest rates, the GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2% per annum during the Eisenhower administration (scarcely more than population growth at the time), and it had declined by 1% during Eisenhower's last twelve months in office.[287]
The economy turned around and prospered during Kennedy's years as president. The GDP expanded by an average of 5.5% from early-1961 to late-1963,[287] while inflation remained steady at around 1% and unemployment eased.[288] Industrial production rose by 15% and motor vehicle sales increased by 40%.[289] This rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until 1969, and has yet to be repeated for such a sustained period of time.[287]
Attorney General Robert Kennedy took the position that steel executives had illegally colluded to fix prices. He stated, "We're going for broke. [...] their expense accounts, where they've been and what they've been doing. [...] the FBI is to interview them all. [...] we can't lose this."[290] The administration's actions influenced U.S. Steel to rescind the price increase.[291] The Wall Street Journal wrote that the administration had acted "by naked power, by threats, [and] by agents of the state security police".[292] Yale law professor Charles Reich opined in The New Republic that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict U.S. Steel for collusion so quickly.[292] An editorial in The New York Times praised Kennedy's actions and said that the steel industry's price increase "imperil[ed] the economic welfare of the country by inviting a tidal wave of inflation".[293] Nevertheless, the administration's Bureau of Budget reported the price increase would have caused a net gain for the GDP as well as a net budget surplus.[294] The stock market, which had steadily declined since Kennedy's election in 1960, dropped 10% shortly after the administration's action on the steel industry took place.[295]
Federal and military death penalty
During his administration, Kennedy oversaw the last federal execution prior to Furman v. Georgia, a 1972 case that led to a moratorium on federal executions.[296] Victor Feguer was sentenced to death by an Iowa federal court and was executed on March 15, 1963.[297] Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by a military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison.[298]
On March 22, 1962, Kennedy signed into law HR5143 (PL87-423), which abolished the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder suspects in the District of Columbia, the only remaining jurisdiction in the United States with such a penalty.[299] The death penalty has not been applied in the District of Columbia since 1957 and has now been abolished.[300]
Civil rights movement
Further information: Civil rights movement
The turbulent end of state-sanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of the 1960s. "Jim Crow" segregation was the established law in the Deep South.[301] The U.S. Supreme Court had ruled in 1954 in Brown v. Board of Education that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional. Many schools, especially those in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Court's decision. The Court also prohibited segregation at other public facilities (such as buses, restaurants, theaters, courtrooms, bathrooms, and beaches) but it continued nonetheless.[302]
 Thurgood Marshall, appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit by Kennedy in May 1961
Kennedy verbally supported racial integration and civil rights; during his 1960 presidential campaign, he telephoned Coretta Scott King, wife of the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr., who had been jailed while trying to integrate a department store lunch counter. Robert Kennedy called Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver and obtained King's release from prison, which drew additional black support to his brother's candidacy.[302] Upon taking office in 1961, Kennedy postponed promised civil rights legislation he made while campaigning in 1960, recognizing that conservative Southern Democrats controlled congressional legislation.[303] During his first year in office, Kennedy appointed many Black people to office including his May appointment of civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to the federal bench.[304]
In his first State of the Union Address in January 1961, President Kennedy said, "The denial of constitutional rights to some of our fellow Americans on account of race at the ballot box and elsewhere disturbs the national conscience, and subjects us to the charge of world opinion that our democracy is not equal to the high promise of our heritage."[305] Kennedy believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would anger many Southern whites and make it more difficult to pass civil rights laws in Congress, including anti-poverty legislation, and he distanced himself from it.[306]
Kennedy was concerned with other issues in the early part of his administration, such as the Cold War, Bay of Pigs fiasco, and the situation in Southeast Asia. As articulated by his brother Robert, the administration's early priority was to "keep the president out of this civil rights mess". Civil rights movement participants, mainly those on the front line in the South, viewed Kennedy as lukewarm,[304] especially concerning the Freedom Riders, who organized an integrated public transportation effort in the south, and who were repeatedly met with white mob violence, including by law enforcement officers, both federal and state. Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders rather than using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents.[304] Robert Kennedy, speaking for the president, urged the Freedom Riders to "get off the buses and leave the matter to peaceful settlement in the courts".[307] Kennedy feared sending federal troops would stir up "hated memories of Reconstruction" after the Civil War among conservative Southern whites.[304]
On March 6, 1961, Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925, which required government contractors to "take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race, creed, color, or national origin".[308] It established the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity. Displeased with Kennedy's pace addressing the issue of segregation, Martin Luther King Jr. and his associates produced a document in 1962 calling on Kennedy to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and use an Executive Order to deliver a blow for civil rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation. Kennedy did not execute the order.[309]
 Kennedy with Boston Mayor John F. Collins (1960 1968) and his wife. On November 20, 1962, Kennedy issued Executive Order 11063 requiring all federal agencies to prevent racial discrimination in federally-funded subsidized housing in the United States.
In September 1962, James Meredith enrolled at the University of Mississippi but was prevented from entering. In response to that, Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent 127 U.S. Marshals and 316 U.S. Border Patrol and 97 Federal correctional officers who were deputized as marshals.[310] The Ole Miss riot of 1962 left two civilians dead and 300 people injured, prompting President Kennedy to send in 3,000 troops to quell the riot.[311] Meredith did finally enroll for a class, and Kennedy regretted not sending in troops earlier. Kennedy began doubting as to whether the "evils of Reconstruction" of the 1860s and 1870s he had been taught or believed in were true.[304] The instigating subculture during the Ole Miss riot, and many other racially ignited events, was the Ku Klux Klan.[312] On November 20, 1962, Kennedy signed Executive Order 11063, which prohibited racial discrimination in federally supported housing or "related facilities".[313] Despite this, in Boston, the Boston Housing Authority (BHA) Board would continue to actively segregate the public housing developments in the city during the John F. Collins administration (1960 1968), with BHA departments engaging in bureaucratic resistance against integration through at least 1966 and the Board retaining control over tenant assignment until 1968.[314]
Both Kennedy and Robert Kennedy were concerned about King's ties to suspected communists Jack O'Dell and Stanley Levison. After Kennedy and his civil rights expert Harris Wofford pressed King to ask both men to resign from the SCLC, King agreed to ask only O'Dell to resign from the organization and allowed Levison, whom he regarded as a trusted advisor, to remain.[315]
In early 1963, Kennedy related to Martin Luther King Jr. his thoughts on the prospects for civil rights legislation: "If we get into a long fight over this in Congress, it will bottleneck everything else, and we will still get no bill."[316] Civil rights clashes were on the rise that year.[317] His brother Robert and Ted Sorensen pressed Kennedy to take more initiative on the legislative front.[318]
 Kennedy's Report to the American People on Civil Rights, June 11, 1963
On June 11, 1963, President Kennedy intervened when Alabama Governor George Wallace blocked the doorway to the University of Alabama to stop two African American students, Vivian Malone and James Hood, from attending. Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama U.S. National Guard, which had just been federalized by order of the president. That evening Kennedy gave his famous Report to the American People on Civil Rights on national television and radio, launching his initiative for civil rights legislation to provide equal access to public schools and other facilities, and greater protection of voting rights.[319][320]
His proposals became part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The day ended with the murder of an NAACP leader, Medgar Evers, in front of his home in Mississippi.[321] As Kennedy had predicted, the day after his TV speech, and in reaction to it, House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two-year signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia (Area Redevelopment Administration) had been defeated, primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans.[322] When Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. complimented Kennedy on his remarks, Kennedy bitterly replied, "Yes, and look at what happened to area development the very next day in the House." He then added, "But of course, I had to give that speech, and I'm glad that I did."[323] On June 16, The New York Times published an editorial which argued that while Kennedy had initially "moved too slowly and with little evidence of deep moral commitment" in regards to civil rights he "now demonstrate[d] a genuine sense of urgency about eradicating racial discrimination from our national life".[324]
Earlier, Kennedy had signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women on December 14, 1961.[325] Former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt led the commission. The Commission statistics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination; its final report, documenting legal and cultural barriers, was issued in October 1963.[326] Further, on June 10, 1963, Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963, which amended the Fair Labor Standards Act and abolished wage disparity based on sex.[327]
 Kennedy meetings with leaders of the March on Washington in the Oval Office, August 28, 1963
Over a hundred thousand people, predominantly African Americans, gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963. Kennedy feared the March would have a negative effect on the prospects for the civil rights bills in Congress, and declined an invitation to speak. He turned over some of the details of the government's involvement to the Dept. of Justice, which channelled hundreds of thousands of dollars to the six sponsors of the March, including the N.A.A.C.P. and Martin Luther King's Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC).[328]
To ensure a peaceful demonstration, the organizers and Kennedy personally edited speeches that were inflammatory and agreed the March would be held on a Wednesday and would be over at 4:00 pm. Thousands of troops were placed on standby. Kennedy watched King's speech on TV and was very impressed. The March was considered a "triumph of managed protest", and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred. Afterwards, the March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with Kennedy and photos were taken. Kennedy felt that the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill.[328]
Nevertheless, the struggle was far from over. Three weeks later on Sunday, September 15, a bomb exploded at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham; by the end of the day, four African American children had died in the explosion, and two other children were shot to death in the aftermath.[329] Due to this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of the president. Kennedy called the congressional leaders to the White House and by the following day the original bill, without the additions, had enough votes to get it out of the House committee.[330] Gaining Republican support, Senator Everett Dirksen promised the legislation would be brought to a vote preventing a Senate filibuster.[331] The legislation was enacted by Kennedy's successor President Lyndon B. Johnson, prompted by Kennedy's memory, after his assassination in November, enforcing voting rights, public accommodations, employment, education, and the administration of justice.[331]
Civil liberties
In February 1962,[332] FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who was suspicious of civil-rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. and viewed him as an upstart troublemaker,[333] presented the Kennedy administration with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists. Concerned by these allegations, the FBI deployed agents to monitor King in the following months.[332] Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy also both warned King to discontinue the suspect associations. After the associations continued, Robert Kennedy issued a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization, in October 1963.[332]
Although Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones "on a trial basis, for a month or so",[334] Hoover extended the clearance so his men were "unshackled" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.[335] The wiretapping continued through June 1966 and was revealed in 1968.[336]
Immigration
During the 1960 campaign, Kennedy proposed an overhaul of American immigration and naturalization laws to ban discrimination based on national origin. He saw this proposal as an extension of his planned civil rights agenda as president.[337] These reforms later became law through the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia. The policy change also shifted the emphasis on the selection of immigrants in favor of family reunification. The late president's brother, Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts helped steer the legislation through the Senate.[338]
Native American relations
Further information: Kinzua Dam  Native Americans, and Seneca nation  Kinzua Dam
Construction of the Kinzua Dam flooded 10,000 acres (4,000 hectares) of Seneca nation land that they had occupied under the Treaty of 1794, and forced 600 Seneca to relocate to Salamanca, New York. Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to intervene and to halt the project, but he declined, citing a critical need for flood control. He expressed concern about the plight of the Seneca and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to help mitigate their displacement.[339][340]
Space policy
Further information: Space policy of the United States and Space Race
 Accompanied by astronaut John Glenn, Kennedy inspects the Project Mercury capsule Friendship 7, February 23, 1962.
The Apollo program was conceived early in 1960, during the Eisenhower administration, as a follow-up to Project Mercury, to be used as a shuttle to an Earth-orbital space station, flights around the Moon, or landing on it. While NASA went ahead with planning for Apollo, funding for the program was far from certain, given Eisenhower's ambivalent attitude to crewed spaceflight.[341] As senator, Kennedy had been opposed to the space program and wanted to terminate it.[342]
 Wernher von Braun and Kennedy
In constructing his presidential administration, Kennedy elected to retain Eisenhower's last science advisor Jerome Wiesner as head of the President's Science Advisory Committee. Wiesner was strongly opposed to crewed space exploration,[343] having issued a report highly critical of Project Mercury.[344][345] Kennedy was turned down by seventeen candidates for NASA administrator before the post was accepted by James E. Webb, an experienced Washington insider who served President Truman as budget director and undersecretary of state. Webb proved to be adept at obtaining the support of Congress, the President, and the American people.[346] Kennedy also persuaded Congress to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act to allow him to delegate his chairmanship of the National Aeronautics and Space Council to the Vice President,
[346][347] both because of the knowledge of the space program Johnson gained in the Senate working for the creation of NASA, and to help keep the politically savvy Johnson occupied.[346]
 Kennedy proposing a program to Congress that will land men on the Moon, May 1961. Johnson and Sam Rayburn are seated behind him.
In Kennedy's January 1961 State of the Union address, he suggested international cooperation in space. Khrushchev declined, as the Soviets did not wish to reveal the status of their rocketry and space capabilities.[348] Early in his presidency, Kennedy was poised to dismantle the crewed space program but postponed any decision out of deference to Johnson, who had been a strong supporter of the space program in the Senate.[342]
This quickly changed on April 12, 1961, when Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space, reinforcing American fears about being left behind in a technological competition with the Soviet Union.[349] Kennedy now became eager for the U.S. to take the lead in the Space Race, for reasons of national security and prestige. On April 20, he sent a memo to Johnson, asking him to look into the status of America's space program, and into programs that could offer NASA the opportunity to catch up.[350][351] After consulting with Wernher von Braun, Johnson responded approximately one week later, concluding that "we are neither making maximum effort nor achieving results necessary if this country is to reach a position of leadership".[352][353] His memo concluded that a crewed Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the United States would achieve it first.[352] Kennedy's advisor Ted Sorensen advised him to support the Moon landing, and on May 25, Kennedy announced the goal in a speech titled "Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs":
... I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish.[354] Full text 
 Kennedy delivers "We choose to go to the Moon" at Rice University, Houston; September 12, 1962 (duration 17:47).
After Congress authorized the funding, Webb began reorganizing NASA, increasing its staffing level, and building two new centers: a Launch Operations Center for the large Moon rocket northwest of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, and a Manned Spacecraft Center on land donated through Rice University in Houston. Kennedy took the latter occasion as an opportunity to deliver another speech at Rice to promote the space effort on September 12, 1962, in which he said:
 No nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. ... We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard.[355] Full text 
On November 21, 1962, in a cabinet meeting with NASA administrator Webb and other officials, Kennedy explained that the Moon shot was important for reasons of international prestige, and that the expense was justified.[356] Johnson assured him that lessons learned from the space program had military value as well. Costs for the Apollo program were expected to reach $40 billion (equivalent to $358.33 billion in 2021).[357]
In a September 1963 speech before the United Nations, Kennedy urged cooperation between the Soviets and Americans in space, specifically recommending that Apollo be switched to "a joint expedition to the Moon".[358] Khrushchev again declined, and the Soviets did not commit to a crewed Moon mission until 1964.[359] On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedy's death, Apollo 11 landed the first crewed spacecraft on the Moon.
Judicial appointments
Main articles: John F. Kennedy Supreme Court candidates and List of federal judges appointed by John F. Kennedy
In 1962, Kennedy appointed justices Byron White and Arthur Goldberg to the Supreme Court of the United States.[citation needed] Additionally, Kennedy appointed 21 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 102 judges to the United States district courts.[citation needed]
Assassination
Main article: Assassination of John F. Kennedy
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the John F. Kennedy assassination.
 The Kennedys and the Connallys in the presidential limousine moments before the assassination in Dallas
President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas at 12:30 p.m. Central Standard Time (CST) on Friday, November 22, 1963. He was in Texas on a political trip to smooth over frictions in the Democratic Party between liberals Ralph Yarborough and Don Yarborough (no relation) and conservative John Connally.[360] Traveling in a presidential motorcade through downtown Dallas, he was shot once in the back, the bullet exiting via his throat, and once in the head.[361]
Kennedy was taken to Parkland Hospital for emergency medical treatment, where he was pronounced dead 30 minutes later, at 1:00 p.m. (CST).[362] He was 46 years old and had been in office for 1,036 days. Lee Harvey Oswald, an order filler at the Texas School Book Depository from which the shots were fired, was arrested for the murder of police officer J. D. Tippit and was subsequently charged with Kennedy's assassination. He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy,[363][364] and was shot dead by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be prosecuted. Ruby was arrested and convicted for the murder of Oswald. Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer on January 3, 1967, while the date for his new trial was being set.
President Johnson quickly issued an executive order to create the Warren Commission chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren to investigate the assassination. The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy.[365] The results of this investigation are disputed by many.[366] The assassination proved to be a pivotal moment in U.S. history because of its impact on the nation, and the ensuing political repercussions. A 2004 Fox News poll found that 66% of Americans thought there had been a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy, while 74% thought that there had been a cover-up.[367] A Gallup Poll in November 2013 showed 61% believed in a conspiracy, and only 30% thought that Oswald did it alone.[368] In 1979, the U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded, with one third of the committee dissenting, that it believed "that Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy. The committee was unable to identify the other gunmen or the extent of the conspiracy." This conclusion was based largely on audio recordings of the shooting.[369] Subsequently, investigative reports from the FBI's Technical Services Division and a specially appointed National Academy of Sciences Committee determined that "reliable acoustic data do not support a conclusion that there was a second gunman."[370] The Justice Department concluded "that no persuasive evidence can be identified to support the theory of a conspiracy" in the Kennedy assassination.[371]
Funeral
 President Kennedy's family leaving his funeral at the U.S. Capitol Building
Main articles: State funeral of John F. Kennedy and List of dignitaries at the state funeral of John F. Kennedy
Kennedy's body was brought back to Washington after his assassination. Early on November 23, six military pallbearers carried the flag-draped coffin into the East Room of the White House, where he lay in repose for 24 hours.[372][373] Then, the coffin was carried on a horse-drawn caisson to the Capitol to lie in state. Throughout the day and night, hundreds of thousands lined up to view the guarded casket,[374][375] with a quarter million passing through the rotunda during the 18 hours of lying in state.[374]
Kennedy's funeral service was held on November 25, at St. Matthew's Cathedral.[376] The Requiem Mass was led by Cardinal Richard Cushing.[376] About 1,200 guests, including representatives from over 90 countries, attended.[377][378] After the service, Kennedy was buried at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia.[379]
Personal life, family, and reputation
Further information: Kennedy family
 The Kennedy brothers: Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, Senator Ted Kennedy, and President John F. Kennedy in 1963
The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States, having produced a president, three senators, three ambassadors, and multiple other representatives and politicians, both at the federal and state level. While a Congressman, Kennedy embarked on a seven-week trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel in 1951, at which point he became close with his then 25-year-old brother Bobby, as well as his 27-year-old sister Pat. Because they were several years apart in age, the brothers had previously seen little of each other. This 25,000-mile (40,000 km) trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends.[380] Bobby would eventually play a major role in his brother's career, serving as his brother's attorney general and presidential advisor.[380] Bobby would later run for president in 1968 before his assassination, while another Kennedy brother, Ted, ran for president in 1980.
Kennedy came in third (behind Martin Luther King Jr. and Mother Teresa) in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century.[381][382] Kennedy was a life member of the National Rifle Association.[383][384]
Wife and children
 The First Family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, 1962
Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Lee "Jackie" Bouvier (1929 1994), when he was a congressman. Charles L. Bartlett, a journalist, introduced the pair at a dinner party.[385] They were married a year after he was elected senator, on September 12, 1953.[386] After suffering a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956 (their daughter Arabella), their daughter Caroline was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family. John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr., nicknamed "John-John" by the press as a child, was born in late November 1960, 17 days after his father was elected. John Jr., a graduate of Brown University, died in 1999 when the small plane he was piloting crashed en route to Martha's Vineyard.[387] In 1963, months before JFK's assassination, Jackie gave birth to a son, Patrick. However, he died after 2 days due to complications from birth.
Popular image
 Yellow Oval Room portrait
Kennedy and his wife were younger than the presidents and first ladies who preceded them, and both were popular in the media culture in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians, influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of numerous photo spreads in popular magazines. Although Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television, Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of the medium.[388] In 1961 the Radio-Television News Directors Association presented Kennedy with its highest honor, the Paul White Award, in recognition of his open relationship with the media.[389]
Mrs. Kennedy brought new art and furniture to the White House and directed its restoration. They invited a range of artists, writers and intellectuals to rounds of White House dinners, raising the profile of the arts in America. On the White House lawn, the Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house, while Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside the home.
Kennedy was closely tied to popular culture, emphasized by songs such as "Twisting at the White House". Vaughn Meader's First Family comedy album, which parodied the president, the first lady, their family, and the administration, sold about four million copies.
In an interview a week after JFK's death, Jacqueline Kennedy mentioned his affection for the Broadway musical  Camelot and quoted its closing lines: "Don't let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief, shining moment that was known as Camelot." The term "Camelot" has come to be used as shorthand for the Kennedy administration and the charisma of the Kennedy family.[390][391]
Health
 Kennedy and Jackie leaving the hospital following his spinal surgery, December 1954
Despite a privileged youth, Kennedy was plagued by a series of childhood diseases, including whooping cough, chicken pox, measles, and ear infections. These ailments compelled him to spend a considerable amount of time in bed (or at least indoors) convalescing. Three months prior to his third birthday, in 1920, Kennedy came down with scarlet fever, a highly contagious and life-threatening disease, and was admitted to Boston City Hospital.[392][13]
Years after Kennedy's death, it was revealed that in September 1947, while Kennedy was 30 and in his first term in Congress, he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addison's disease, a rare endocrine disorder. Davis estimated that Kennedy would not live for another year, while Kennedy himself hoped he could live for an additional ten.[393] In 1966, White House physician Dr. Janet Travell revealed that Kennedy also had hypothyroidism. The presence of two endocrine diseases raises the possibility that Kennedy had autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 (APS 2).[394]
Kennedy also suffered from chronic and severe back pain, for which he had surgery. Kennedy's condition may have had diplomatic repercussions, as he appears to have been taking a combination of drugs to treat severe back pain during the 1961 Vienna Summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. The combination included hormones, animal organ cells, steroids, vitamins, enzymes, and amphetamines, and possible potential side effects included hyperactivity, hypertension, impaired judgment, nervousness, and mood swings.[395] Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by three doctors, one of whom, Max Jacobson, was unknown to the other two, as his mode of treatment was controversial[396] and used for the most severe bouts of back pain.[397]
Into late 1961, disagreements existed among Kennedy's doctors concerning his proper balance of medication and exercise. Kennedy preferred the former because he was short on time and desired immediate relief.[275] During that time, the president's physician, George Burkley, did set up some gym equipment in the White House basement, where Kennedy did stretching exercises for his back three times a week.[398] Details of these and other medical problems were not publicly disclosed during Kennedy's lifetime.[399] The President's primary White House physician, George Burkley, realized that treatments by Jacobson and Travell, including the excessive use of steroids and amphetamines, were medically inappropriate, and took action to remove Kennedy from their care.[400]
In 2002, Robert Dallek wrote an extensive history of Kennedy's health. Dallek was able to consult a collection of Kennedy-associated papers from the years 1955 1963, including X-rays and prescription records from the files of Dr. Travell. According to Travell's records, during his presidential years Kennedy suffered from high fevers; stomach, colon, and prostate issues; abscesses; high cholesterol; and adrenal problems. Travell kept a "Medicine Administration Record", cataloging Kennedy's medications: "injected and ingested corticosteroids for his adrenal insufficiency; procaine shots and ultrasound treatments and hot packs for his back; Lomotil, Metamucil, paregoric, phenobarbital, testosterone, and trasentine to control his diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, and weight loss; penicillin and other antibiotics for his urinary-tract infections and an abscess; and Tuinal to help him sleep."[19]
Family incidents
Main article: Kennedy curse
Kennedy's older brother Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. was killed in action in 1944 at age 29 when his plane exploded over the English Channel during a first attack execution of Operation Aphrodite during World War II.[401] His sister Rose Marie "Rosemary" Kennedy was born in 1918 with intellectual disabilities and underwent a prefrontal lobotomy at age 23, leaving her incapacitated until her death in 2005. Another sister Kathleen Agnes "Kick" Kennedy died in a plane crash en route to France in 1948. His wife Jacqueline Kennedy suffered a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956: a daughter informally named Arabella.[402] A son, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, died two days after birth in August 1963.
Affairs and friendships
 Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, and John F. Kennedy talk during the president's May 19, 1962, early birthday party, where Monroe publicly serenaded Kennedy with "Happy Birthday, Mr. President"
Kennedy was single in the 1940s while having relationships with Danish journalist Inga Arvad[403] and actress Gene Tierney.[404] During his time as a senator, he had an affair with Gunilla von Post, who later wrote that the future president tried to end his marriage to be with her before having any children with his wife.[405] Kennedy was also reported to have had affairs with Marilyn Monroe,[406] Judith Campbell,[407] Mary Pinchot Meyer,[408] Marlene Dietrich,[409] Mimi Alford,[410] and his wife's press secretary, Pamela Turnure.[411]
The full extent of Kennedy's relationship with Monroe (who in 1962 famously sang "Happy Birthday, Mr. President" at Kennedy's birthday celebration) is not known, though it has been reported that they spent a weekend together in March 1962 while he was staying at Bing Crosby's house.[412] Furthermore, people at the White House switchboard noted that Monroe had called Kennedy during 1962.[413] J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, received reports about Kennedy's indiscretions.[414] These included an alleged East German spy Ellen Rometsch. According to historian Michael Beschloss, in July 1963, Hoover reportedly informed Bobby Kennedy about the affair. Hoover told the attorney general that he had information that the president, as well as others in Washington, had been involved with a woman "suspected as a Soviet intelligence agent, someone linked to East German intelligence". Bobby Kennedy reportedly took the matter sufficiently seriously to raise it with leading Democratic and Republican figures in Congress.[415][416] Former Secret Service agent Larry Newman recalled "morale problems" that the president's indiscretions engendered within the Secret Service.[417]
Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters.[418] According to Reeves, this included "the logistics of Kennedy's liaisons ... [which] required secrecy and devotion rare in the annals of the energetic service demanded by successful politicians."[419] Kennedy believed that his friendly relationship with members of the press would help protect him from public revelations about his sex life.[420]
Lem Billings was Kennedy's "oldest and best friend" from the time they attended Choate together until Kennedy's death.[421]
Historical evaluations and legacy
 The Kennedy half dollar was first issued in 1964.
 John F. Kennedy statue outside the Massachusetts State House in Boston
 The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, in Boston
Presidency
 Official White House portrait of Kennedy, by Aaron Shikler
The US Special Forces had a special bond with Kennedy. "It was President Kennedy who was responsible for the rebuilding of the Special Forces and giving us back our Green Beret," said Forrest Lindley, a writer for the US military newspaper Stars and Stripes who served with Special Forces in Vietnam.[b] This bond was shown at Kennedy's funeral. At the commemoration of the 25th anniversary of Kennedy's death, General Michael D. Healy, the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam, spoke at Arlington National Cemetery. Later, a wreath in the form of the Green Beret would be placed on the grave, continuing a tradition that began the day of his funeral when a sergeant in charge of a detail of Special Forces men guarding the grave placed his beret on the coffin.[422] Kennedy was the first of six presidents to have served in the U.S. Navy,[423] and one of the enduring legacies of his administration was the creation in 1961 of another special forces command, the Navy SEALs,[424] which Kennedy enthusiastically supported.[425]
Kennedy's civil rights proposals led to the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[426] President Lyndon B. Johnson, Kennedy's successor, took up the mantle and pushed the landmark Civil Rights Act through a bitterly divided Congress by invoking the slain president's memory.[427][428] President Johnson then signed the Act into law on July 2, 1964. This civil rights law ended what was known as the "Solid South" and certain provisions were modeled after the Civil Rights Act of 1875, signed into law by President Ulysses S. Grant.[429]
Kennedy's continuation of Presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower's policies of giving economic and military aid to South Vietnam left the door open for President Johnson's escalation of the conflict.[430] At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam, leading historians, cabinet members, and writers to continue to disagree on whether the Vietnam conflict would have escalated to the point it did had he survived.[431][224] His agreement to the NSAM 263[221] action of withdrawing 1,000 troops by the end of 1963, and his earlier 1963 speech at American University,[223] suggest that he was ready to end the Vietnam War. The Vietnam War contributed greatly to a decade of national difficulties, amid violent disappointment on the political landscape.
Many of Kennedy's speeches (especially his inaugural address) are considered iconic; and despite his relatively short term in office, and the lack of major legislative changes coming to fruition during his term, he is considered by many presidential historians to be in the upper echelon of presidents.[432] Some excerpts of Kennedy's inaugural address are engraved on a plaque at his grave at Arlington. In 2018 The Times published an audio recreation of the "watchmen on the walls of world freedom" speech he was scheduled to deliver at the Dallas Trade Mart on November 22, 1963.[433][434]
In 1961, he was awarded the Laetare Medal by the University of Notre Dame, considered the most prestigious award for American Catholics.[435] He was posthumously awarded the Pacem in Terris Award (Latin: Peace on Earth). It was named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that calls upon all people of goodwill to secure peace among all nations. Kennedy also posthumously received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963.[436]
Memorials and eponyms
Main article: List of memorials to John F. Kennedy
 The graves of Kennedy and his wife at John F. Kennedy Eternal Flame memorial, Arlington National Cemetery
A small sample of the extensive list at the main article (link above) includes:
Idlewild Airport in Queens, New York City, nation's busiest international gateway, renamed John F. Kennedy International Airport on December 24, 1963
NASA Launch Operations Center in Merritt Island, Florida named the John F. Kennedy Space Center on November 29, 1963.
USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67), U.S. Navy aircraft carrier ordered in April 1964, launched May 1967, decommissioned August 2007; nicknamed "Big John"
Kennedy half dollar, first minted in 1964
John F. Kennedy School of Government, part of Harvard University, renamed in 1966
John F. Kennedy Federal Building in the Government Center section of Boston, opened in 1966
John Fitzgerald Kennedy Memorial, opened in 1970 in Dallas
National cultural center was named John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in 1964, opened in 1971 in Washington, D.C.
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum on Columbia Point in Boston; opened in 1979
Statue of John F. Kennedy by Isabel McIlvain on the grounds of the Massachusetts State House in Boston; dedicated on May 29, 1990.
USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79), U.S. Navy aircraft carrier that began construction in 2011, and was scheduled to be placed in commission in 2020
 New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport, the busiest international gateway to North America, is named after Kennedy and given the code JFK, his initials.
Works
Audio
Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War
President Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Kennedy's message to Turkey
Kennedy's message to Turkish President Cemal Gursel and The Turkish People on the Anniversary of the Death of Kemal Atat rk, November 10, 1963 (accompanying text)
Announcement to go to the moon
Announcement by John F. Kennedy to go to the moon (duration 00:11)
Secret Societies speech
JFK Secret Societies speech
Problems playing these files? See media help.
Books
Hahn, Lorna (1960). "John F. Kennedy (introduction)". North Africa: Nationalism to Nationhood. Public Affairs Press. LCCN 60011401.
Kennedy, John F. (1940). Why England Slept. W. Funk.
Kennedy, John F. (1956). Profiles in Courage. Harper.
Kennedy, John F. (1958). A Nation of Immigrants. Anti-Defamation League. ISBN 978-0-06-144754-9.
Video
Newsreel footage of the inauguration ceremony and speeches
 Newsreel footage of the inauguration ceremony and speeches
See also
Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy
Cultural depictions of John F. Kennedy
Presidential transition of John F. Kennedy
Doyle, William, PT 109: An American Epic of War, Survival, and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy, (2015), New York, Harper Collins, ISBN 978-0-06-234658-2
Electoral history of John F. Kennedy
1960 United States presidential debates
Eyre Square
Jesuit Ivy
Kennedy Doctrine
Lincoln Kennedy coincidences urban legend
List of memorials to John F. Kennedy
Orville Nix, photographer of a film of the assassination
"Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy" retort by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, 1988 VP debate
The Torch of Friendship
Timeline of the presidency of John F. Kennedy
Zapruder film
Abraham Zapruder, photographer of the primary film of assassination
General
History of the United States (1945 1964)
List of assassinated American politicians
List of presidents of the United States
List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
List of presidents of the United States who died in office
List of United States presidential assassination attempts and plots
Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps
Notes
^ After the war, Kennedy contacted the captain of the Amagiri, Kohei Hanami, and formed a friendship with him. Hanami later supported Kennedy's election campaign.[51]
^ Kennedy reversed the Defense Department rulings that prohibited the Special Forces wearing of the Green Beret. Reeves 1993, p. 116.
References
Citations
^ a b c d "John F. Kennedy Miscellaneous Information". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. Archived from the original on August 31, 2009. Retrieved February 22, 2012.
^ "John F. Kennedy". whitehousehistory.org. Washington, D.C.: White House Historical Association. Retrieved May 1, 2022.
^ a b Dallek 2003, p. 20.
^ "JFK John F Kennedy baptism St. Aidan's church Brookline".
^ "Churches Attended by John F. Kennedy | JFK Library". www.jfklibrary.org.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 26 27.
^ Thomas, Evan. Robert Kennedy: His Life. Simon & Schuster. p. 47.
^ "John F Kennedy's Birthplace--Presidents: A Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary". www.nps.gov.
^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020). JFK Coming of Age in the American Century, 1917-1956. Random House. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-8129-9713-2.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 21.
^ a b "John F. Kennedy: Early Years". Retrieved April 17, 2017.
^ Thomas, Evan. Robert Kennedy: His Life. Simon & Schuster. p. 33.
^ a b "Life of John F. Kennedy | JFK Library". www.jfklibrary.org.
^ Kennedy, Edward M. (2009). True Compass: A Memoir. Twelve; First edition. p. 37. ISBN 978-0-446-53925-8.
^ "John F. Kennedy's Residences". Retrieved April 17, 2017.
^ Failla, Zak (November 18, 2013). "Looking Back on JFK's Time in Bronxville". The Daily Voice. Retrieved August 14, 2017.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 34.
^ a b Kenney 2000, p. 11.
^ a b c Dallek, Robert (December 2002). "The Medical Ordeals of JFK". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2015.
^ "John F. Kennedy's Princeton University undergraduate alumni file". Mudd Manuscript Library Blog. November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2015.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 42.
^ Benson, Kenneth Arline (August 14, 1963). "The "House That Jack Built": JFK And His Late Brother Built Adobe Shack For Arizona Rancher". The Daily News. Virgin Islands. Retrieved August 29, 2016.
^ Hunt, Sharon E. (May 14, 2013). "The Civilian Conservation Corps in Southern Arizona: Jack and Joe Kennedy in Arizona". The Civilian Conservation Corps in Southern Arizona. Retrieved August 29, 2016.
^ Barkhorn, Eleanor (November 21, 2013). "JFK's Very Revealing Harvard Application Essay". The Atlantic.
^ "Memorial Hall Auditorium Filled to Capacity at Annual Freshman Smoker". The Harvard Crimson. May 5, 1937. Retrieved February 18, 2012.
^ Donovan 2001, p. 7.
^ Clarke, John (May 19, 2015), "Selling J.F.K.'s Boat", The New Yorker, retrieved October 2, 2015
^ Dallek 2003, p. 49.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 54.
^ a b Daum 2008, pp. 127.
^ "Obama joins list of seven presidents with Harvard degrees". Harvard Gazette. Harvard University. November 6, 2008. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2012.
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 61 66.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 15 17.
^ Kenney 2000, p. 18.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 68.
^ Kenney 2000, p. 21.
^ O'Brien 2005, pp. 114, 117 118.
^ "John F. Kennedy, Jr". Veteran Tributes. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ a b c d e "President John Fitzgerald Kennedy (1917 1963)". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ a b c d e f g h "John Fitzgerald Kennedy 29 May 1917   22 November 1963". Naval History and Heritage Command. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ Ballard 2002, pp. 12, 36.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 19, 20.
^ Renehan, Edward J. Jr. (2002). The Kennedys at War: 1937 1945. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-385-50529-1   via Google Books.
^ "Pell, Claiborne: Oral History Interview   JFK #1, 2/6/1967 | JFK Library". www.jfklibrary.org.
^ Donovan 2001, p. 20.
^ "Lieutenant John F. Kennedy, USN". Naval Historical Center. June 18, 2002. Archived from the original on September 12, 2007. Retrieved September 17, 2007.
^ "USS PT 109". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 99, 100.
^ "USS PT-109 Final Crew List". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 106.
^ "   ". American View (in Japanese). Embassy of the United States of America in Japan. April 5, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2020.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 106 107, 119.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 106 107, 124.
^ Doyle 2015, pp. 66 106, 134 139.
^ "JFK's epic Solomons swim" BBC News July 30, 2003.
^ Doyle 2015, pp. 143 148.
^ "Leonard Jay "Lenny" Thom (1917 1946)". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ "The Story of Leonard Jay Thom. (Executive Officer PT 109)". petertare.org. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ "John F. Kennedy and PT 109". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ Doyle 2015, pp. 181, 187.
^ Doyle 2015, p. 182.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 172 184.
^ Donovan 2001, p. 189.
^ Doyle 2015, pp. 193.
^ "Record of John F. Kennedy's Naval Service". Naval History & Heritage Command. June 18, 2002. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012.
^ a b "JFK: A Timeline of His Life 1917 1963". St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ O'Brien 2005, pp. 179, 180.
^ "Peoria Open Space Master Plan: Chapter 4   Historic and Cultural Resources" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014.
^ "Joseph Kennedy Jr". A+E Networks Corp. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 98.
^ "John F. Kennedy Received "Non-Combat" Recognition for Wartime Action". Defense Media Network, Faircount Media Group. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ "Lt. John F. Kennedy's WWII Medals: Navy Marine Corps Medal and Purple Heart". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
^ "Citation for the Navy Marine Corps Medal". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 180.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 104.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 118.
^ Sorensen, Ted (1965). Kennedy. Harper & Row. pp. 21. ISBN 978-1-56852-035-3.
^ "The New Generation Offers a Leader". March 21, 2016.
^ Massachusetts Secretary of Commonwealth: Election Statistics 1946.
^ "JFK | American Experience | PBS". PBS.
^ a b "JFK in Congress". National Archives. March 24, 2017.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 24 26.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 26 29.
^ "Fast Facts about John F. Kennedy | JFK Library". www.jfklibrary.org.
^ "JFK John F. Kennedy boy scouts". January 2, 1961.
^ Meagher, Michael (2011). John F. Kennedy: A Biography. Greenwood. pp. 35.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 254.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 29 31.
^ Shaw, John T. (October 15, 2013). JFK in the Senate. St. Martin's Press. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8.
^ Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (May 15, 2018). American Values: Lessons I Learned from My Family. Harper. p. 142. ISBN 978-0-06-084834-7.
^ a b "John F. Kennedy". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved January 16, 2017.
^ Kenney 2000, p. 29.
^ a b Edward Smith, Dr. Jean (March 1967). "Kennedy and Defense The formative years". Air University Review. Archived from the original on December 12, 2008. Retrieved September 18, 2007.
^ Tofel, Richard J. (May 9, 2008). "In His Own Words". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 28, 2010.
^ "World Book". www.worldbookonline.com.
^ "John F. Kennedy Study Guide: The Star Senator". SparkNotes.
^ "The 'Famous Five'". United States Senate. March 12, 1959. Retrieved May 11, 2019.
^ a b ""JFK's Early Campaign"1957 | The Pop History Dig". pophistorydig.com.
^ "John F. Kennedy's Pre-Presidential Voting Record & Stands on Issues (p. 2 of 9) | JFK Library". www.jfklibrary.org.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 34 35.
^ Shaw, John T. "JFK in the Senate: Pathway to the Presidency". Macmillan. Retrieved August 3, 2016.[permanent dead link]
^ "John F. Kennedy   Presidential candidate and president". Encyclopedia Britannica.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 37.
^ a b O'Brien 2005, p. 370.
^ O'Brien 2005, pp. 370, 371.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 372.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 374.
^ "John F. Kennedy's Pre-Presidential Voting Record & Stands on Issues (p. 1 of 9) | JFK Library". www.jfklibrary.org.
^ "Book by President Kennedy To Be Published on Oct. 7". The New York Times. September 3, 1964.
^ "The U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy Story". jfklibrary.org. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 25, 2015.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 35 36.
^ "Rachel Carson and JFK, an Environmental Tag Team". Audubon. May 8, 2012.
^ The Kennedys Archived February 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. American Experience. Boston, Massachusetts: WGBH. 2009.
^ Schlesinger 2002, p. 12.
^ O'Brien 2005, pp. 274 79, 394 99.
^ "Kennedy Letter Opens Campaign For Presidency". Tampa Bay Times. December 18, 1959. p. 1. Archived from the original on March 2, 2020   via Newspapers.com.
^ a b Brinkley 2012, pp. 38 45.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 45 47.
^ Cosgrave, Ben (May 24, 2014). "Head to Head: JFK and RFK, Los Angeles, July 1960". Time Magazine. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2018.
^ Brinkley 2012, p. 47.
^ Caro, Robert (2012). The Passage of Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson. New York: Vintage Books. p. 406. ISBN 978-0-375-71325-5.
^ Soderstrom, Carl; Soderstrom, Robert; Stevens, Chris; Burt, Andrew (2018). Forty Gavels: The Life of Reuben Soderstrom and the Illinois AFL-CIO. 3. Peoria, IL: CWS Publishing. pp. 175-176. ISBN 978-0-9982575-3-2.
^ Kennedy, John F. (July 15, 1960). "Address of Senator John F. Kennedy Accepting the Democratic Party Nomination for the Presidency of the United States". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
^ Brinkley 2012, p. 49.
^ Kennedy, John F. (June 18, 2002). "Address to the Greater Houston Ministerial Association". American Rhetoric. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved September 17, 2007.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 15.
^ Carty, Thomas J. (2004). A Catholic in the White House? Religion, Politics, and John F. Kennedy's Presidential Campaign. New York City: Palgrave Macmillan.
^ Casey, Shaun A. (2009). The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960. New York City: Oxford University Press.
^ Lacroix, Patrick (2021). John F. Kennedy and the Politics of Faith. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. pp. 21 44.
^ "The Kennedy Nixon Presidential Debates, 1960". history.com. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved September 18, 2007.
^ a b c Bruschke, John; Laura, Divine (March 2017). "Debunking Nixon's radio victory in the 1960 election: Re-analyzing the historical record and considering currently unexamined polling data". The Social Science Journal. 54 (1): 67 75. doi:10.1016/j.soscij.2016.09.007. S2CID 151390817.
^ Vancil, David L.; Pendell, Sue D. (1987). "The myth of viewer listener disagreement in the first Kennedy Nixon debate". Central States Speech Journal. 38 (1): 16 27. doi:10.1080/10510978709368226.
^ a b Dudley & Shiraev 2008, p. 83.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 21.
^ a b Kennedy, John F. (January 20, 1961). "Inaugural Address". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2012.
^ Kempe 2011, p. 52.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 22.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 23, 25.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 56.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 66.
^ Art, Robert J. (1968). The TFX decision; McNamara and the military. Boston: Little, Brown. pp. ix xi. OCLC 294546.
^ Shapley, Deborah (1993). Promise and power: the life and times of Robert McNamara. Boston: Little, Brown. pp. 202 223. ISBN 978-0-316-78280-7.
^ Klein, Christopher. "10 Things You May Not Know About John F. Kennedy". HISTORY.
^ Kempe 2011, pp. 76 78.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 145.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 161 171.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 175.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 185.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 201.
^ Daum 2008, pp. 51 55.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 213.
^ "Remarks of Senator John F. Kennedy at Saint Anselm's College, Manchester, New Hampshire, March 5, 1960". JFKlibrary.org. John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. March 5, 1960. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2010.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 233, 238.
^ Gleijeses (1995), pp. 9 19
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 69 73.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 71, 673.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 268 294, 838 839.
^ Jean Edward Smith, "Bay of Pigs: The Unanswered Questions", The Nation, April 13, 1964.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 95 97.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 290, 295.
^ Hayes, Matthew A. (2019). "Robert Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis: A Reassertion of Robert Kennedy's Role as the President's 'Indispensable Partner' in the Successful Resolution of the Crisis" (PDF). History. 104 (361): 473 503. doi:10.1111/1468-229X.12815. ISSN 1468-229X. S2CID 164907501.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 264.
^ a b "U.S. planned massive Cuba invasion force, the kidnapping of Cuban officials". USA Today. October 30, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2019.
^ "1962 US Joint Chiefs Of Staff Operation Northwoods Unclassified Document Bolsheviks NWO". Internet Archive. 1962.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 345.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 245.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 387.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 388.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 389.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 390.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 403.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 426.
^ Kenney 2000, pp. 184 186.
^ Kenney 2000, p. 189.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 425.
^ JFK's "Address on the First Anniversary of the Alliance for Progress", White House reception for diplomatic cors of the Latin American republics, March 13, 1962. Public Papers of the Presidents  John F. Kennedy (1962), p. 223.
^ Kennedy, John F. (John Fitzgerald) (2005). John F. Kennedy: 1962 : containing the public messages, speeches, and statements of the president, January 20 to December 31, 1962.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 788, 789.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 140 142.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 152.
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 338 339.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 606 607.
^ Meisler, Stanley (2011). When the World Calls: The Inside Story of the Peace Corps and Its First Fifty Years. Beacon Press. ISBN 978-0-8070-5049-1.
^ "Peace Corps, Fast Facts". Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
^ "JFK in the Senate by John T. Shaw:Books in Review". Vietnam Veterans of America. Retrieved October 8, 2020.
^ ""America's Stake in Vietnam" Speech by U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy, June 1, 1956". State Historical Society of Iowa. January 25, 2019. Retrieved November 22, 2019.
^ "'America's Stake In Vietnam' Speech, 1 June 1956". JFK Library. Retrieved November 22, 2019.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 75.
^ Karnow 1991, pp. 230, 268.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 119.
^ Dunnigan & Nofi 1999, p. 257.
^ a b President John Fitzgerald Kennedy, President John F. Kennedy: "After Two Years: A Conversation with the President" on YouTube, Interview with the President / December 16, 1962, minutes 54:50 55:18.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 240.
^ Halberstam, David (1992). The Best and the Brightest. New York: Ballantine Books. pp. 169 172. ISBN 0-449-90870-4.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 242.
^ "Brief Overview of Vietnam War". Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
^ "Vietnam War Allied Troop Levels 1960 73". The American War Library. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
^ Tucker 2011, p. 1070.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 281.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 259.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 283.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 484.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 558.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 559.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 562 563.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 573.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 577.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 560.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 595.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 602.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 609.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 610.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 613.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 617.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 650.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 651.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 660.
^ Ellis, Joseph J. (2000). "Making Vietnam History". Reviews in American History. 28 (4): 625 629. doi:10.1353/rah.2000.0068. S2CID 144881388.
^ Talbot, David (June 21, 2007). "Warrior For Peace". Time Magazine. Archived from the original on June 28, 2007. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
^ Blight & Lang 2005, p. 276.
^ a b Bundy, McGeorge (October 11, 1963). "National Security Action Memorandum # 263". JFK Lancer. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2012.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 680.
^ a b "Marking the 50th Anniversary of JFK's Speech on Campus". American University. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
^ a b Matthews 2011, pp. 393, 394.
^ a b Sorensen 1966, p. 359.
^ Karnow 1991, pp. 339, 343.
^ "Generations Divide Over Military Action in Iraq". Pew Research Center. October 2002. Archived from the original on February 2, 2008. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Bundy, McGeorge (November 26, 1963). "National Security Action Memorandum Number 273". JFK Lancer. Retrieved February 19, 2012.
^ "NSAM 273: South Vietnam". Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2012.
^ Mufson, Steve (August 4, 2015). "Obama will echo Kennedy's American University nuclear speech from 1963". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 6, 2015.
^ Wang, Joy Y. (August 4, 2015). "Obama to follow in John F. Kennedy's historic footsteps". msnbc.com. msnbc.com. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2015.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 513 514.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 514.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 534.
^ Gehler, Michael; Kaiser, Professor of European Studies Wolfram; Kaiser, Wolfram (2004). Christian Democracy in Europe Since 19455. ISBN 978-1-135-75385-6.
^ Geis, Anna; M ller, Harald; Sch rnig, Niklas (2013). The Militant Face of Democracy. ISBN 978-1-107-03740-3.
^ Kulski, W. W (1966). De Gaulle and the World. Syracuse University Press. p. 29. de gaulle and germany european counterweight.
^ Ninkovich, Frank (1994). Modernity and Power. ISBN 978-0-226-58650-2.
^ Daum 2008, pp. 125 63.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 624.
^ Daum 2008, pp. 147 56.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 537.
^ John F. Kennedy: "Speech by Senator John F. Kennedy, Zionists of America Convention, Statler Hilton Hotel, New York, NY," August 26, 1960
^ Shannon, Vaughn P. (2003). Balancing Act: US Foreign Policy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-7546-3591-8.
^ Walt, Stephen M. (1987). The Origins of Alliances, Cornell University Press, pp. 95 96
^ a b Salt 2008, p. 201.
^ Cohen, Avner (May 3, 2019). "How a Standoff with the U.S. Almost Blew up Israel's Nuclear Program". Haaretz.
^ "The Battle of the Letters, 1963: John F. Kennedy, David Ben-Gurion, Levi Eshkol, and the U.S. Inspections of Dimona | National Security Archive". April 29, 2019.
^ a b c Salt 2008, p. 202.
^ Hersh, Samson Option, pp. 110 11
^ Trachtenberg, Marc (February 8, 1999). A Constructed Peace: The Making of the European Settlement, 1945 1963. Princeton University Press. p. 403, Appendix Eight (Chapter Nine, Note 134). Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved November 20, 2012.
^ "U.S. Seeks to Impede Israel's Nuclear Development (August 1961)".
^ Hersh, Samson Option, p. 112
^ Salt 2008, p. 203.
^ Salt 2008, pp. 201 205.
^ "President Kennedy Discussion of Johnson Plan (August 1962)". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org.
^ DiEugenio, James. "Nasser, Kennedy, the Middle East, and Israel". www.kennedysandking.com.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 3 5.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 36.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 37, 40 42.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 43 45.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 45, 57 58.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 60 61, 80.
^ "President John F. Kennedy on His Historic Trip to Ireland". Shapell Manuscript Collection. Shapell Manuscript Foundation. Archived from the original on May 17, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2013.
^ Sorensen 1966, p. 656.
^ a b "Timeline". JFKhomecoming. 2013.
^ "1963: Warm welcome for JFK in Ireland". BBC News. June 27, 1963. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ "JFK is First Foreign Leader to Address D il  ireann (Text and video)". RT  Archives. June 28, 1963.
^ "Address Before the Irish Parliament in Dublin, June 28, 1963 (Text and audio)". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. June 28, 1963.
^ "President Kennedy in Ireland (Text and video)". RT  Archives. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
^ Ryan, Ray (June 21, 2013). "The best four days of JFK's life". Irish Examiner. Cork. ISSN 1393-9564. Retrieved February 6, 2022.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 552.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 227.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 229.
^ a b Reeves 1993, p. 243.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 542.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 548.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 550.
^ a b Jaikumar, Arjun (July 10, 2011). "On taxes, let's be Kennedy Democrats. Or Eisenhower Republicans. Or Nixon Republicans". Daily Kos. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ "Voter Education Project". kingencyclopedia.stanford.edu. July 5, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ "Kennedy, John Fitzgerald". kingencyclopedia.stanford.edu. May 31, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ Ippolito, Dennis (2004). Why Budgets Matter: Budget Policy and American Politics. Penn State Press. pp. 173 175. ISBN 978-0-271-02260-4.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 453.
^ Barnes 2007, p. 8.
^ Frum 2000, p. 293.
^ Frum 2000, p. 324.
^ a b c "BEA: Quarterly GDP figures by sector, 1953 1964". United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ "Consumer and Gross Domestic Price Indices: 1913 to 2002" (PDF). U.S. Census Bureau. 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2005. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ "Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1964" (PDF). U.S. Department of Commerce. July 1964. Retrieved March 28, 2010.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 298.
^ "The Presidency: Smiting the Foe". TIME. April 20, 1962. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008.
^ a b O'Brien 2005, p. 645.
^ "Inflation in Steel". The New York Times. April 12, 1962.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 300.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 318 320.
^ "Executions 1790 to 1963". April 13, 2003. Archived from the original on April 13, 2003. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ Goldberg, Carey (May 6, 2001). "Federal Executions Have Been Rare but May Increase". The New York Times. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ Riechmann, Deb (July 29, 2008). "Bush: Former Army cook's crimes warrant execution". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 31, 2008. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ "Legislative Summary: District of Columbia". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "Norton Letter to U.S. Attorney Says Death Penalty Trial That Begins Today Part of Troubling and Futile Pattern". Office of Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton. January 8, 2007. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved February 23, 2012.
^ Grantham (1988), The Life and Death of the Solid South: A Political History, p. 156
^ a b Dallek 2003, pp. 292 293.
^ Brauer 2002, p. 487. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrauer_2002 (help)
^ a b c d e Brauer 2002, p. 490. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrauer_2002 (help)
^ "John F. Kennedy", Urs Swharz, Paul Hamlyn, 1964
^ Bryant 2006, pp. 60, 66.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 123 126.
^ wikisource   Executive Order No. 10925
^ "Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Global Freedom Struggle". Stanford University. April 26, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ "U.S. Marshals Mark 50th Anniversary of the Integration of 'Ole Miss'". www.usmarshals.gov. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved April 25, 2020.
^ Bryant 2006, p. 71.
^ Gitlin (2009), The Ku Klux Klan: A Guide to an American Subculture, p. 29
^ Dallek 2003, p. 580.
^ Vale, Lawrence J. (2000). From the Puritans to the Projects: Public Housing and Public Neighbors. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp. 301 320. ISBN 978-0674025752.
^ "Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Global Freedom Struggle". Stanford University. May 31, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 467.
^ In the first week of June there were 160 incidents of violence. Reeves 1993, p. 515.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 515.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 521 523.
^ Kennedy, John F. "Civil Rights Address". AmericanRhetoric.com. Retrieved September 20, 2007.
^ Schlesinger 2002, p. 966.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 524.
^ Cohen 2016, p. 357.
^ Goduti 2012, p. 206.
^ "John F. Kennedy: Executive Order 10980". Retrieved January 25, 2011.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 433.
^ "The Equal Pay Act Turns 40". Archive.eeoc.gov. Archived from the original on June 26, 2012.
^ a b Reeves 1993, pp. 580 584.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 599 600.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 628 631.
^ a b Brauer 2002, p. 492. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrauer_2002 (help)
^ a b c "Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)". Stanford University. May 2, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ "The FBI's War on King". American Public Radio. Retrieved November 13, 2015.
^ Herst 2007, p. 372.
^ Herst 2007, pp. 372 374.
^ Garrow, David J. (July 8, 2002). "The FBI and Martin Luther King". The Atlantic.
^ Kennedy, John F. (August 6, 1960). "From Press Office: Senator John F. Kennedy, Immigration and Naturalization Laws, Hyannis Inn Motel, Hyannis, MA". Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project. Retrieved September 20, 2007.
^ Ludden, Jennifer (May 9, 2006). "Q&A: Sen. Kennedy on Immigration, Then & Now". NPR. Retrieved September 20, 2007.
^ Bilharz 2002, p. 55.
^ Kennedy, John F. (August 11, 1961). "320 Letter to the President of the Seneca Nation of Indians Concerning the Kinzua Dam on the Allegheny River". The American Presidency Project. Retrieved February 25, 2012.
^ Murray and Cox, Apollo, p. 60.
^ a b Reeves 1993, p. 138.
^ Nelson 2009, p. 145.
^ Levine, Future of the US Space Program, p. 71.
^ Levine, Anold S. (1982). Managing NASA in the Apollo Era, chapter 27, "The Lunar Landing Decision and Its Aftermath". NASA SP-4102.
^ a b c Nelson 2009, p. 146.
^ Kenney 2000, pp. 115 116.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 502.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 393.
^ Kennedy, John F. (April 20, 1961). "Memorandum for Vice President". The White House (Memorandum). Boston: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2013.
^ Launius, Roger D. (July 1994). "President John F. Kennedy Memo for Vice President, 20 April 1961" (PDF). Apollo: A Retrospective Analysis (PDF). Monographs in Aerospace History Number 3. Washington, D.C.: NASA. OCLC 31825096. Retrieved August 1, 2013. Key Apollo Source Documents.
^ a b Johnson, Lyndon B. (April 28, 1961). "Memorandum for the President". Office of the Vice President (Memorandum). Boston: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2013.
^ Launius, Roger D. (July 1994). "Lyndon B. Johnson, Vice President, Memo for the President, 'Evaluation of Space Program,' 28 April 1961" (PDF). Apollo: A Retrospective Analysis (PDF). Monographs in Aerospace History Number 3. Washington, D.C.: NASA. OCLC 31825096. Retrieved August 1, 2013. Key Apollo Source Documents.
^ Kennedy, John F. (1961). "Apollo Expeditions to the Moon: Chapter 2". history.nasa.gov. Retrieved February 26, 2012.
^ Kennedy, John F. (September 12, 1962). "President John F. Kennedy: The Space Effort". Rice University. Archived from the original on July 8, 2006.
^ Selverstone, Marc. "JFK and the Space Race". White House Tapes Presidential Recordings Program, Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2012.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 652 653.
^ Wikisource: John F. Kennedy's Address Before the 18th General Assembly of the United Nations
^ Dallek 2003, p. 654.
^ Russ. "26, 2009#P12844 Life in Legacy". Lifeinlegacy.com. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2010.
^ "Doctors attending to Kennedy reported". November 1963. Retrieved May 15, 2018.
^ "November 22, 1963: Death of the President | JFK Library". www.jfklibrary.org. Retrieved July 25, 2021.
^ Lee Oswald claiming innocence (film), Youtube.com
^ Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 366, Kantor Exhibit No. 3 Handwritten notes made by Seth Kantor concerning events surrounding the assassination
^ Brauer 2002, p. 497. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrauer_2002 (help)
^ Gus Russo and Stephen Molton "Did Castro OK the Kennedy Assassination?," American Heritage, Winter 2009.
^ Blanton, Dana (June 18, 2004). "Poll: Most Believe 'Cover-Up' of JFK Assassination Facts". Fox News. Archived from the original on April 16, 2010. Retrieved September 25, 2012.
^ "Majority in U.S. Still Believe JFK Killed in a Conspiracy: Mafia, federal government top list of potential conspirators". Gallup, Inc. November 15, 2013. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016.
^ "Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the U.S. House of Representatives". U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ Council, National Research (1982). Report of the Committee on Ballistic Acoustics. doi:10.17226/10264. ISBN 978-0-309-25372-7.
^ "PDF Justice Department of JFK-King Reinvestigation" (PDF). The Harold Weisberg Archive. p. 5. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 9, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2022.
^ Associated Press 1963, pp. 36 37, 56 57, 68 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAssociated_Press1963 (help)
^ The New York Times 2003, pp. 197 201
^ a b White 1965, p. 16
^ NBC News 1966, pp. 106 107, 110, 114 115, 119 123, 133 134
^ a b White 1965, p. 17
^ Associated Press 1963, p. 93 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAssociated_Press1963 (help)
^ NBC News 1966, p. 126
^ White 1965, p. 18
^ a b Reeves 1993, p. 29.
^ The Gallup Poll 1999. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources Inc. 1999. pp. 248 249.
^ "Greatest of the Century". Gallup/CNN/USA Today Poll. December 20 21, 1999. Retrieved January 5, 2007.
^ Raymond, Emilie (2006). From my cold, dead hands: Charlton Heston and American politics. University Press of Kentucky. p. 246. ISBN 978-0-8131-2408-7.
^ "Books for Lawyers". American Bar Association Journal: 556. 1975.
^ Cover story, Time magazine, January 20, 1961
^ Specious allegations in 1997 by UK journalist Terry O'Hanlon Golden, Andrew (July 27, 1997). "JFK The Bigamist. ... . The Truth At Last; Kennedy was already married when he got wed to Jackie. ... ". Sunday Mirror. Retrieved October 31, 2010. and by author Seymour Hersh Reingold, Joyce (March 26, 2008). "JFK 'Secret Marriage' A Story With Legs". Palm Beach Daily News. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2010. that Kennedy had married previously have been soundly disproven. Reeves states that Ben Bradlee, then at Newsweek, inspected FBI files on it, and confirmed the falsehood. Reeves 1993, p. 348; for further refutation, see O'Brien 2005, p. 706.
^ "Kennedy Plane Found to Be Fully Functional". The Washington Post. July 31, 1999. Retrieved January 2, 2010.
^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006). "Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference 93 years young!". American Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008.
^ "RTDNA's Kennedy connections". Radio Television Digital News Association, November 26, 2013. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2014.
^ The Personal Papers of Theodore H. White (1915 1986): Series 11. Camelot Documents, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum quotation:The 1963 LIFE article represented the first use of the term "Camelot" in print and is attributed with having played a major role in establishing and fixing this image of the Kennedy Administration and period in the popular mind.
^ An Epilogue, in LIFE, Dec 6, 1963, pp.158 9
^ Dallek 2003, p. 32.
^ "JFK (Part 1)". American Experience. Season 25. Episode 7. November 11, 2013. PBS. WGBH. Retrieved September 24, 2019.
^ Mandel, Lee R. (2009). "Endocrine and Autoimmune Aspects of the Health History of John F. Kennedy". Annals of Internal Medicine. 151 (5): 350 354. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-151-5-200909010-00011. PMID 19721023.
^ Kempe 2011, p. 213.
^ New York Sun September 20, 2005: "Dr. Feelgood" Retrieved July 11, 2011
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 42, 158 159.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 244.
^ Online NewsHour with Senior Correspondent Ray Suarez and physician Jeffrey Kelman, "Pres. Kennedy's Health Secrets", The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer transcript, November 18, 2002
^ Ghaemi M.D., M.P.H., Nassir (September 14, 2011). "What Jackie Kennedy Didn't Say and Didn't Know". Psychology Today. Retrieved August 22, 2016.
^ "Operation Aphrodite  HistoricWings.com :: A Magazine for Aviators, Pilots and Adventurers". historicwings.com.
^ "The Children of Jacqueline Kennedy". www.firstladies.org. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 83 85.
^ Osborne 2006, p. 195.
^ Kole, William J. (May 5, 2021). "JFK love letters to Swedish mistress to be sold at auction". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Retrieved May 8, 2021.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 315 316.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 289.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 475.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 58.
^ Garrow, David J. (May 28, 2003). "Substance Over Sex In Kennedy Biography". The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2013.
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 475, 476.
^ Leaming 2006, pp. 379 380.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 581.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 376.
^ Booknotes interview with historian Michael Beschloss on The Crisis Years: Kennedy and Khrushchev (C-SPAN: June 21, 1991)
^ Taylor Branch, "Kennedys and Hoover: How Their Battles Affected King" Los Angeles Times (December 18, 1988)
^ Larry Sabato, "John F. Kennedy's Final Days Reveal A Man Who Craved Excitement" Forbes (October 16, 2013)
^ Barnes 2007, p. 116.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 291.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 478.
^ Pitts, David (2007). John F. Kennedy and Lem Billings: The Untold Story of an Extraordinary Friendship. p. xi. 
^ "JFK's personal connection to Army's Green Berets". CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
^ "Presidents Who Served in the U.S. Navy". Frequently Asked Questions. Naval History & Heritage Command. January 11, 2007. Archived from the original on May 5, 2011. Retrieved May 12, 2011.
^ "Navy SEALs Were Launched in the JFK 'Man on the Moon' Speech". 11 Facts About Navy SEALs. Retrieved May 12, 2011.[dead link]
^ Salinger, Pierre (1997). John F. Kennedy: Commander in Chief: A Profile in Leadership. New York: Penguin Studio. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-670-86310-5. Retrieved February 22, 2012.
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 594 606, 644.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 708.
^ "50 years after win, Kennedy's legacy endures". USA Today. September 26, 2010. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
^ Walton & Smith 2000, p. 205.
^ Page, Susan (October 4, 2011). "50 years after win, Kennedy's legacy endures". USA Today. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
^ Douthat, Ross (November 26, 2011). "The Enduring Cult of Kennedy". New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2011.
^ "Total Scores/Overall Rankings | C-SPAN Survey on Presidents 2021 | C-SPAN.org". www.c-span.org.
^ Rogan, Aaron (March 15, 2018). "JFK video: hear Kennedy's 'lost' Dallas speech in his own voice". The Times. Retrieved May 10, 2018.
^ Kennedy, John F. (November 22, 1963). "Remarks Prepared for Delivery at the Trade Mart in Dallas, TX, November 22, 1963 [Undelivered]". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved May 10, 2018.
^ "Recipients". The Laetare Medal. University of Notre Dame. Retrieved July 31, 2020.
^ Wetterau, Bruce (1996). The Presidential Medal of Freedom : winners and their achievements. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc. p. 58. ISBN 1-56802-128-3. Retrieved September 9, 2019.
Works cited
Alford, Mimi; Newman, Judith (2011). Once Upon A Secret: My Affair with President John F. Kennedy and its Aftermath. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-193175-9.
Ballard, Robert D. (2002). Collision With History: The Search for John F. Kennedy's PT 109. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic. ISBN 978-0-7922-6876-5.
Barnes, John (2007). John F. Kennedy on Leadership. New York: AMACOM. ISBN 978-0-8144-7455-6.
Bilharz, Joy Ann (2002) [1998]. The Allegany Senecas and Kinzua Dam: Forced Relocation Through Two Generations. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-1282-4.
Blight, James G.; Lang, Janet M. (2005). The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-4221-1.
Brinkley, Alan (2012). John F. Kennedy. New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-8349-1.
Bryant, Nick (Autumn 2006). "Black Man Who Was Crazy Enough to Apply to Ole Miss". The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (53): 31, 60 71. JSTOR 25073538   via JSTOR.
Bugliosi, Vincent (2007). Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John F. Kennedy. New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-04525-3.
Cohen, Andrew (2016) [2014]. Two Days in June: John F. Kennedy and the 48 Hours That Changed History (illustrated, reprint ed.). Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. ISBN 978-0-7710-2389-7.
Dallek, Robert (2003). An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917 1963. Boston: Little, Brown and Co. ISBN 978-0-316-17238-7.
Daum, Andreas (2008). Kennedy in Berlin. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85824-3.
Donovan, Robert J. (2001) [1961]. PT-109: John F. Kennedy in WW II (40th Anniversary ed.). New York: McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-137643-3.
Doyle, William (2015). PT-109: An American Epic of War, Survival, and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy. New York: Harper-Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-234658-2.
Dudley, Robert L.; Shiraev, Eric (2008). Counting Every Vote: The Most Contentious Elections in American History. Dulles, VA: Potomac Books. ISBN 978-1-59797-224-6.
Dunnigan, James; Nofi, Albert (1999). Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War. New York: St. Martin's. ISBN 978-0-312-19857-2.
Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04196-1.
Gibson, Bryan R. (2015). Sold Out? US Foreign Policy, Iraq, the Kurds, and the Cold War. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-48711-7.
Gleijeses, Piero (February 1995). "Ships in the Night: The CIA, the White House and the Bay of Pigs". Journal of Latin American Studies. 27 (1): 1 42. doi:10.1017/S0022216X00010154. ISSN 0022-216X. S2CID 146390097   via Semantic Scholar.
Goduti, Philip A. Jr. (2012). Robert F. Kennedy and the Shaping of Civil Rights, 1960 1964. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-4943-9.
Herst, Burton (2007). Bobby and J. Edgar: The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J. Edgar Hoover That Transformed America. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-1982-2.
Jewell, Elizabeth (2005). U.S. Presidents Factbook. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-72073-4.
Karnow, Stanley (1991). Vietnam, A History. New York: Viking Press Random House. ISBN 978-0-670-74604-0.
Kempe, Frederick (2011). Berlin 1961. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5.
Kenney, Charles (2000). John F. Kennedy: The Presidential Portfolio. New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-891620-36-2.
Leaming, Barbara (2006). Jack Kennedy: The Education of a Statesman. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393051-61-2.
Maier, Thomas (2004). The Kennedys: America's Emerald Kings. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-4016-1.
Matthews, Chris (2011). Jack Kennedy: Elusive Hero. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-3508-9.
McNamara, Robert S. (2000). Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the Vietnam Tragedy. New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-891620-87-4.
Nelson, Craig (2009). Rocket Men: The Epic Story of the First Men on the Moon. New York: John Murray. ISBN 978-0-670-02103-1.
O'Brien, Michael (2005). John F. Kennedy: A Biography. New York: Thomas Dunne. ISBN 978-0-312-28129-8.
Osborne, Robert (2006). Leading Ladies: The 50 Most Unforgettable Actresses of the Studio Era. San Francisco: Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-5248-7.
Reeves, Richard (1993). President Kennedy: Profile of Power. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-64879-4.
Salt, Jeremey (2008). The Unmaking of the Middle East: A History of Western Disorder in Arab lands. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25551-7.
Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. (2002) [1965]. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-21927-8.
Sorensen, Theodore (1966) [1965]. Kennedy (paperback). New York: Bantam. OCLC 2746832.
Tucker, Spencer (2011) [1998]. The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-960-3.
Walton, Hanes Jr.; Smith, Robert C. (2000). American Politics and the African American Quest for Universal Freedom. New York: Addison, Wesley, Longman. ISBN 978-0-321-07038-8.
The Torch is Passed. New York: Associated Press. Associated Press. 1963.
NBC News (1966). There Was a President. New York: Random House.
White, Theodore Harold (1965). The Making of the President, 1964. New York: Atheneum.
The New York Times (2003).  Semple, Robert B. Jr. (ed.). Four days in November. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Further reading
Main article: Bibliography of John F. Kennedy
Brauer, Carl. J (1977). John F. Kennedy and the Second Reconstruction. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-08367-6.
Burner, David (1988). John F. Kennedy and a New Generation. Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-0-205-60345-9.
Casey, Shaun. The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960 (2009, ISBN 978-0-19-537448-3)
Collier, Peter & Horowitz, David. The Kennedys (1984, ISBN 978-0-671-44793-9)
Cottrell, John. Assassination! The World Stood Still (1964, OCLC 605055832)
Douglass, James W. (2008). JFK and the Unspeakable: Why He Died and Why It Matters. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books. ISBN 978-1-57075-755-6.
Fay, Paul B., Jr. The Pleasure of His Company (1966, OCLC 60678238)
Freedman, Lawrence. Kennedy's Wars: Berlin, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam (2000, ISBN 978-0-19-513453-7)
Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali. One Hell of a Gamble: Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958 1964 (1997, ISBN 978-0-393-04070-8)
Giglio, James. The Presidency of John F. Kennedy (1991, ISBN 978-0-7006-1436-3)
Hamilton, Nigel. JFK: Reckless Youth (1992, ISBN 978-0-679-41216-8)
Harper, Paul, and Krieg, Joann P. eds. John F. Kennedy: The Promise Revisited (1988, ISBN 978-0-313-26201-2)
Harris, Seymour E. The Economics of the Political Parties, with Special Attention to Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy (1962, OCLC 614522002)
Haas, Lawrence J. The Kennedys in the World: How Jack, Bobby, and Ted Remade America's Empire (2021)
Heath, Jim F. Decade of Disillusionment: The Kennedy Johnson Years (1976, ISBN 978-0-253-31670-7)
Hersh, Seymour. The Dark Side of Camelot (1997, ISBN 978-0-316-35955-9)
Kunz, Diane B. The Diplomacy of the Crucial Decade: American Foreign Relations during the 1960s (1994, ISBN 978-0-231-08176-4)
Logevall, Fredrik. JFK: Coming of Age in the American Century, 1917-1956 (Random House, 2020, ISBN 978-0-8129-9713-2)
Lynch, Grayston L. Decision for Disaster: Betrayal at the Bay of Pigs (2000, ISBN 978-1-57488-148-6)
Manchester, William. Portrait of a President: John F. Kennedy in Profile (1967, ISBN 978-0-316-54494-8) online, popular biography
Manchester, William (1967). The Death of a President: November 20 25, 1963. New York: Harper & Row. LCCN 67010496.
Massa, Mark S. "A Catholic for President: John F. Kennedy and the Secular Theology of the Houston Speech, 1960." Journal of Church and State 39 (1997): 297 317.
Newman, John M. JFK and Vietnam: Deception, Intrigue, and the Struggle for Power (1992, ISBN 978-1-5304-7793-7)
Parmet, Herbert. Jack: The Struggles of John F. Kennedy (1980, ISBN 978-0-8037-4452-3)
Parmet, Herbert. JFK: The Presidency of John F. Kennedy (1983, ISBN 978-0-385-27419-7)
Parmet, Herbert. "The Kennedy Myth". In Myth America: A Historical Anthology, Volume II. Gerster, Patrick, and Cords, Nicholas. (editors.) (1997, ISBN 978-1-933385-13-6)
Rabe, Stephen G. John F. Kennedy: World Leader (Potomac Books, 2010) 189 pages
Reeves, Thomas. A Question of Character: A Life of John F. Kennedy (1991, ISBN 978-0-02-925965-8); hostile biography
Sabato, Larry J. The Kennedy Half-Century: The Lasting Legacy of John F. Kennedy (2013, ISBN 978-1-62040-280-1)
Schlesinger, Arthur Jr. Robert Kennedy and His Times (2018, ISBN 978-1-328-56756-7) [1978]
Whalen, Thomas J. JFK and His Enemies: A Portrait of Power (2014, ISBN 978-1-4422-1374-6)
Primary sources
Goldzwig, Steven R. and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds. In a Perilous Hour: The Public Address of John F. Kennedy (1995, ISBN 978-0-313-27770-2)
Kennedy, Jacqueline. Jacqueline Kennedy: Historic Conversations on Life with John F. Kennedy (2011, ISBN 1-4013-2425-8). Hyperion Books.
Historiography and memory
Abramson, Jill. "Kennedy, the Elusive President", The New York Times Book Review October 22, 2013, notes that 40,000 books have been published about JFK
Craig, Campbell. "Kennedy's international legacy, fifty years on." International affairs 89.6 (2013): 1367 1378. online
Hellmann, John. The Kennedy Obsession: The American Myth of JFK (1997, ISBN 978-0-231-10798-3)
Kazin, Michael (December 2017). "An Idol and Once a President: John F. Kennedy at 100". Journal of American History. 104 (3): 707 726. doi:10.1093/jahist/jax315. ISSN 0021-8723.
Knott, Stephen F. Coming to Terms with John F. Kennedy (2022) excerpt
Santa Cruz, Paul H. Making JFK Matter: Popular Memory and the 35th President (Denton: University of North Texas Press, 2015) xxiv, 363 pp.
Selverstone, Marc J., ed. A Companion to John F. Kennedy (Wiley-Blackwell, 2014, ISBN 978-1-4443-5036-4), Topical essays by scholars focusing on the historiography
External links
John F. Kennedy  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource
Official
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site
White House biography
Media coverage
John F. Kennedy collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Appearances on C-SPAN
"Life Portrait of John F. Kennedy", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, November 5, 1999
Radio coverage of the assassination of President Kennedy as broadcast on WCCO-AM Radio (Minneapolis) and CBS Radio
Other
United States Congress. "John F. Kennedy (id: K000107)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
John F. Kennedy: A Resource Guide   the Library of Congress
Extensive Essays on JFK with shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady   Miller Center of Public Affairs
Kennedy Administration from Office of the Historian, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Works by or about John F. Kennedy at Internet Archive
Works by John F. Kennedy at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
John F. Kennedy at Curlie
John F. Kennedy at IMDb
Works by John F. Kennedy at Project Gutenberg
Kennedy Convocation Collection at the Amherst College Archives & Special Collections, documenting one of his last visits before his assassination
vteJohn F. Kennedy
35th President of the United States (1961 1963)
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1953 1960)
U.S. Representative for MA 11 (1947 1953)
Presidency(timeline)
Presidential office: Transition
Inauguration
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Presidential pardons
Domestic policy: Clean Air Act
Communications Satellite Act
Community Mental Health Act
Equal Pay Act
Federal affirmative action
Federal housing segregation ban
Fifty-mile hikes
Food for Peace
New Frontier
Pilot Food Stamp Program
Presidential Medal of Freedom
Space policy
Status of Women (Presidential Commission)
University of Alabama integration
Voter Education Project
All-Channel Receiver Act
Foreign policy: Alliance for Progress
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Flexible response
Kennedy Doctrine
Peace Corps
Trade Expansion Act
USAID
Vietnam War
Cuba: Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Project
Cuban Missile Crisis
ExComm
Soviet Union: Berlin Crisis
Moscow Washington hotline
Vienna summit
White House: Presidential limousine
Presidential yacht
Resolute desk
Situation Room
Presidentialspeeches
Inaugural address
American University speech
"We choose to go to the Moon"
Report to the American People on Civil Rights
"Ich bin ein Berliner"
"A rising tide lifts all boats"
Remarks at Amherst College on the Arts
Elections
U.S. States House of Representatives elections: 1946
1948
1950
U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1952
1958
1960 presidential primaries
1960 presidential campaign
Democratic National Conventions: 1956
1960
U.S. presidential election 1960
debates
Personal life
Birthplace and childhood home
Kennedy Compound
Hickory Hill
Wexford
Navy service: PT-109
Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana
Arthur Evans
PT-59
Castle Hot Springs
Hammersmith Farm
Coretta Scott King phone call
Rocking chair
"Happy Birthday, Mr. President"
Books
Why England Slept (1940)
Profiles in Courage (1956)
A Nation of Immigrants (1958)
Death
Assassination
timeline
reactions
in popular culture
State funeral
Riderless horse
attending dignitaries
Gravesite and Eternal Flame
Legacy
Bibliography
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
Profile in Courage Award
Twenty-fourth Amendment
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Apollo 11 Moon landing
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Kennedy Space Center
Kennedy Round
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
VISTA
Cultural depictions
films
Kennedy half dollar
U.S. postage stamps
U.S. five cent stamp
Lincoln Kennedy coincidences
Operation Sail
Memorials,namesakes
Harvard Kennedy School
Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts
John F. Kennedy Federal Building (Boston)
John F. Kennedy International Airport
Boston statue
Brooklyn memorial
Dallas memorial
London memorial
Portland memorial
Runnymede memorial
John F. Kennedy Memorial Bridge
John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School
John F. Kennedy University
John F. Kennedy Stadium
Kennedy Expressway
Mount Kennedy
MV John F. Kennedy
USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67)
USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79)
Yad Kennedy
Family
Jacqueline Bouvier (wife)
Caroline Kennedy (daughter)
John F. Kennedy Jr. (son)
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son)
Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Jack Schlossberg (grandson)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Fitzgerald (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Robert F. Kennedy (brother)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Ted Kennedy (brother)
P. J. Kennedy (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)
Pushinka (dog)
  Dwight D. Eisenhower
Lyndon B. Johnson  
 Category
vteJacqueline Kennedy OnassisLife events
Hammersmith Farm
Hickory Hill
Kennedy Compound
Wexford
1040 Fifth Avenue
First Lady of the United States
White House restoration
Televised White House tour
Tour of India and Pakistan
White House Historical Association
White House Curator
Committee for the Preservation of the White House
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
State funeral of John F. Kennedy
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
Eternal Flame and burial site
Fashion
Wedding dress of Jacqueline Bouvier
Pink Chanel suit
Honors andmemorials
Jacqueline Kennedy Garden
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School for International Careers
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School ballet
Related
Cultural depictions
Jackie O (1997 opera)
Jackie (2016 film)
Family
John F. Kennedy (first husband, presidency)
Aristotle Onassis (second husband)
Caroline Kennedy (daughter)
John F. Kennedy Jr. (son)
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son)
Jack Schlossberg (grandson)
Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter)
John Vernou Bouvier III (father)
Janet Lee Bouvier (mother)
Lee Radziwill (sister)
Hugh D. Auchincloss (stepfather)
Janet Auchincloss Rutherfurd (half-sister)
Edith Ewing Bouvier (aunt)
Edith Bouvier Beale (cousin)
James T. Lee (grandfather)
John Vernou Bouvier Jr. (grandfather)
Pushinka (dog)
Offices and distinctions
U.S. House of Representatives
Preceded byJames Michael Curley
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Massachusetts's 11th congressional district 1947 1953
Succeeded byTip O'Neill
Party political offices
Preceded byDavid I. Walsh
 Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Massachusetts(Class 1) 1952, 1958
Succeeded byTed Kennedy
Preceded byAdlai Stevenson II
 Democratic nominee for President of the United States 1960
Succeeded byLyndon B. Johnson
U.S. Senate
Preceded byHenry Cabot Lodge Jr.
 United States Senator (Class 1) from Massachusetts 1953 1960        Served alongside: Leverett Saltonstall
Succeeded byBenjamin A. Smith II
Political offices
Preceded byDwight D. Eisenhower
 President of the United States 1961 1963
Succeeded byLyndon B. Johnson
Honorary titles
Preceded byUnknown Soldiers of World War II and the Korean War
 Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1963
Succeeded byDouglas MacArthur
Articles related to John F. Kennedy
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteDemocratic Party
History
Second Party System
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Nationalconventionsandpresidentialtickets
1828 (None): Jackson/Calhoun
1832 (Baltimore): Jackson/Van Buren
1835 (Baltimore): Van Buren/R. Johnson
1840 (Baltimore): Van Buren/None
1844 (Baltimore): Polk/Dallas
1848 (Baltimore): Cass/Butler
1852 (Baltimore): Pierce/King
1856 (Cincinnati): Buchanan/Breckinridge
1860 (Charleston/Baltimore): Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
1864 (Chicago): McClellan/Pendleton
1868 (New York): Seymour/Blair
1872 (Baltimore): Greeley/Brown
1876 (Saint Louis): Tilden/Hendricks
1880 (Cincinnati): Hancock/English
1884 (Chicago): Cleveland/Hendricks
1888 (Saint Louis): Cleveland/Thurman
1892 (Chicago): Cleveland/Stevenson I
1896 (Chicago): W. Bryan/Sewall
1900 (Kansas City): W. Bryan/Stevenson I
1904 (Saint Louis): Parker/H. Davis
1908 (Denver): W. Bryan/Kern
1912 (Baltimore): Wilson/Marshall
1916 (Saint Louis): Wilson/Marshall
1920 (San Francisco): Cox/Roosevelt
1924 (New York): J. Davis/C. Bryan
1928 (Houston): Smith/Robinson
1932 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Garner
1936 (Philadelphia): Roosevelt/Garner
1940 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Wallace
1944 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Truman
1948 (Philadelphia): Truman/Barkley
1952 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Sparkman
1956 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Kefauver
1960 (Los Angeles): Kennedy/L. Johnson
1964 (Atlantic City): L. Johnson/Humphrey
1968 (Chicago): Humphrey/Muskie
1972 (Miami Beach): McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
1976 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1980 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1984 (San Francisco): Mondale/Ferraro
1988 (Atlanta): Dukakis/Bentsen
1992 (New York): B. Clinton/Gore
1996 (Chicago): B. Clinton/Gore
2000 (Los Angeles): Gore/Lieberman
2004 (Boston): Kerry/Edwards
2008 (Denver): Obama/Biden
2012 (Charlotte): Obama/Biden
2016 (Philadelphia): H. Clinton/Kaine
2020 (Milwaukee/other locations): Biden/Harris
2024 (Chicago)
Presidentialadministrations
Jackson (1829 1837)
Van Buren (1837 1841)
Polk (1845 1849)
Pierce (1853 1857)
Buchanan (1857 1861)
A. Johnson (1868 1869)
Cleveland (1885 1889; 1893 1897)
Wilson (1913 1921)
Roosevelt (1933 1941; 1941 1945)
Truman (1945 1953)
Kennedy (1961 1963)
L. B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Carter (1977 1981)
Clinton (1993 2001)
Obama (2009 2017)
Biden (2021 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andCaucuschairs
A. Stevenson (1827 1834)
Bell (1834 1835)
Polk (1835 1839)
J. W. Jones (1843 1845)
Davis (1845 1847)
Cobb (1849 1851)
Boyd (1851 1855)
G. W. Jones (1855 1857)
Orr (1857 1859)
Houston (1859 1861)
Niblack/Randall (1869 1871)
Niblack (1873 1875)
Kerr (1875 1876)
Randall (1876 1881)
Carlisle (1883 1889)
Holman (1889 1891)
Crisp (1891 1895)
D. B. Culberson (1895 1897)
Richardson (1897 1903)
Williams (1903 1909)
Clark (1909 1921)
Kitchin (1921 1923)
Garrett (1923 1929)
Garner (1929 1933)
Rainey (1933 1934)
Byrns (1935 1936)
Bankhead (1936 1940)
Rayburn (1940 1961)
McCormack (1962 1971)
Albert (1971 1977)
O'Neill (1977 1987)
Wright (1987 1989)
Foley (1989 1995)
Gephardt (1995 2003)
Pelosi (2003 2023)
Jeffries (2023 )
U.S. SenateleadersandCaucuschairs
J. W. Stevenson (1873 1877)
Wallace (1877 1881)
Pendleton (1881 1885)
Beck (1885 1890)
Gorman (1890 1898)
Turpie (1898 1899)
J. K. Jones (1899 1903)
Gorman (1903 1906)
Blackburn (1906 1907)
C. A. Culberson (1907 1909)
Money (1909 1911)
Martin (1911 1913)
Kern (1913 1917)
Martin (1917 1919)
Hitchcock (1919 1920)
Underwood (1920 1923)
Robinson (1923 1937)
Barkley (1937 1949)
Lucas (1949 1951)
McFarland (1951 1953)
Johnson (1953 1961)
Mansfield (1961 1977)
Byrd (1977 1989)
Mitchell (1989 1995)
Daschle (1995 2005)
Reid (2005 2017)
Schumer (2017 )
Chairs ofthe DNC
Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez
Harrison
State andterritorialparties
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Democrats Abroad
AffiliatedgroupsCongress
Senate Caucus
Policy Committee
Steering and Outreach Committee
United States Senate Democratic Conference Secretary
House Caucus
Fundraising
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors
National Democratic Redistricting Committee
Sectional
College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Stonewall Young Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America
Related
Primaries
Presidential candidates
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
2006 House Caucus leadership election
2018 House Caucus leadership election
2022 House Caucus leadership election
Weekly Democratic Address
vteUnited States senators from MassachusettsClass 1
Dalton
Cabot
Goodhue
Mason
Adams
Lloyd
Gore
Ashmun
Mellen
Mills
Webster
Choate
Webster
Winthrop
Rantoul
Sumner
Washburn
Dawes
Lodge Sr.
Butler
Walsh
Lodge Jr.
J. Kennedy
Smith
E. Kennedy
Kirk
Brown
Warren
Class 2
Strong
Sedgwick
Dexter
Foster
Pickering
Varnum
Otis
Lloyd
Silsbee
Davis
Bates
Davis
Everett
Rockwell
Wilson
Boutwell
Hoar
Crane
J. Weeks
Walsh
Gillett
Coolidge
Lodge Jr.
S. Weeks
Saltonstall
Brooke
Tsongas
Kerry
Cowan
Markey
vteMembers of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts1st district
F. Ames
Dexter
Goodhue
Holten
Sedgwick
Skinner
Sedgwick
J. Bacon
Eustis
Quincy
Ward Jr.
Mason
Gorham
Webster
Gorham
N. Appleton
Gorham
A. Lawrence
Fletcher
A. Lawrence
Winthrop
N. Appleton
Winthrop
S. Eliot
W. Appleton
Scudder
T. D. Eliot
Hall
T. D. Eliot
Buffington
Crapo
R. Davis
Randall
Wright
G. Lawrence
Treadway
Heselton
Conte
Olver
Neal
2nd district
Goodhue
Foster
W. Lyman
Sedgwick
Ward Sr.
W. Lyman
Shepard
J. Crowninshield
Story
Pickman
W. Reed
Pickering
Silsbee
Barstow
B. Crowninshield
Choate
Phillips
Saltonstall
D. King
Rantoul
Fay
Crocker
Buffington
O. Ames
Harris
Long
E. Morse
Gillett
Churchill
Bowles
Kaynor
Granfield
Clason
Furcolo
Boland
Neal
McGovern
3rd district
Gerry
Bourne
Coffin
S. Lyman
Mattoon
Cutler
Nelson
Livermore
White
Pickering
Nelson
Varnum
Nelson
Osgood
Cushing
A. Abbott
Duncan
Edmands
Damrell
C. Adams
Thomas
A. Rice
Twichell
Whiting I
Pierce
Field
B. Dean
Field
Ranney
L. Morse
J. Andrew
Walker
J. R. Thayer
R. Hoar
C. Washburn
J. A. Thayer
Wilder
Paige
F. Foss
Casey
Philbin
Drinan
Donohue
Early
Blute
McGovern
N. Tsongas
Trahan
4th district
Sedgwick
Dearborn
G. Thatcher
Wadsworth
Foster
L. Lincoln Sr.
Hastings
Varnum
W. Richardson
Dana
Stearns
Fuller
E. Everett
Sa. Hoar
Parmenter
Thompson
Palfrey
Thompson
Sabine
Walley
Comins
A. Rice
Hooper
Frost
J. Abbott
L. Morse
Collins
O'Neil
Apsley
Weymouth
Tirrell
Mitchell
Wilder
Winslow
Stobbs
P. Holmes
Donohue
Drinan
Frank
Kennedy III
Auchincloss
5th district
Partridge
Bourne
Freeman
L. Williams
T. Dwight
Ely
Mills
Lathrop
Sibley
J. Davis
L. Lincoln Jr.
Hudson
C. Allen
W. Appleton
Burlingame
W. Appleton
Hooper
Alley
Butler
Gooch
Banks
Bowman
L. Morse
Hayden
Banks
Sh. Hoar
Stevens
Knox
B. Ames
J. Rogers
E. Rogers
B. Morse
Cronin
P. Tsongas
Shannon
Atkins
Meehan
N. Tsongas
Markey
Clark
6th district
G. Thatcher
Leonard
J. Reed Sr.
J. Smith
Taggart
S. Allen
Locke
Kendall
Grennell
Alvord
Baker
Ashmun
G. Davis
Upham
T. Davis
Alley
Gooch
Banks
Butler
Thompson
Loring
Stone
Lovering
Lodge
Cogswell
Moody
Gardner
Lufkin
A.P. Andrew
G. Bates
W. Bates
Harrington
Mavroules
Torkildsen
Tierney
Moulton
7th district
Leonard
Ward Sr.
Leonard
Bullock
Bishop
Mitchell
Barker
Baylies
Turner
Baylies
Hulbert
Shaw
H. Dwight
S. Allen
Grennell
Briggs
J. Rockwell
Goodrich
Banks
Gooch
Boutwell
Brooks
Esty
E. Hoar
Tarbox
Butler
W. Russell
Stone
Cogswell
W. Everett
Barrett
Roberts
Phelan
Maloney
W. Connery
L. Connery
Lane
Macdonald
Markey
Capuano
Pressley
8th district
Grout
G. Thatcher
F. Ames
Otis
Eustis
L. Williams
Green
Gardner
Green
J. Reed Jr.
Baylies
Sampson
Hobart
Lathrop
Bates
Calhoun
J. Adams
Mann
Wentworth
Knapp
Train
Baldwin
G. Hoar
J. M. S. Williams
Warren
Claflin
Candler
W Russell
C. H. Allen
Greenhalge
Stevens
McCall
Deitrick
Dallinger
H. Thayer
Dallinger
Healey
Goodwin
Macdonald
O'Neill
Kennedy II
Capuano
Lynch
9th district
Varnum
Bishop
J. Dean
Wheaton
J. Reed Jr.
Folger
J. Reed Jr.
H. Dwight
Briggs
Jackson
Hastings
H. Williams
Hale
Fowler
Little
De Witt
E. Thayer
Bailey
A. Walker
W. Washburn
Crocker
G. Hoar
W. Rice
T. Lyman
Ely
Burnett
Candler
G. Williams
O'Neil
Fitzgerald
Conry
Keliher
Murray
Roberts
Fuller
Underhill
Luce
R. Russell
Luce
T. H. Eliot
Gifford
Nicholson
Keith
McCormack
Hicks
Moakley
Lynch
Keating
10th district
Goodhue
Sewall
Read
Hastings
Upham
J. Allen
Brigham
Wheaton
Morton
F Baylies
Bailey
H. A. S. Dearborn
W. Baylies
Borden
H. Williams
Borden
Burnell
Grinnell
Scudder
Dickinson
Chaffee
Delano
Dawes
Crocker
Stevens
Seelye
Norcross
W. Rice
J. E. Russell
J. Walker
McEttrick
Atwood
Barrows
Naphen
McNary
O'Connell
Curley
Murray
Tague
Fitzgerald
Tague
Douglass
Tinkham
Herter
Curtis
Martin
Heckler
Studds
Delahunt
Keating
11th district
Bradbury
Bartlett
Cutler
Stedman
A. Bigelow
Brigham
B. Adams
J. Russell
Hobart
J. Richardson
J. Adams
J. Reed Jr.
Burnell
Goodrich
Trafton
Dawes
Chapin
Robinson
Whiting II
Wallace
Coolidge
Draper
Sprague
Powers
Sullivan
Peters
Tinkham
Douglass
Higgins
Flaherty
Curley
Kennedy
O'Neill
Burke
Donnelly
12th district
H. Dearborn
I. Parker
Lee
S. Thatcher
Skinner
Larned
Bidwell
Bacon
Dewey
Hulbert
Strong
Kendall
L. Bigelow
Baylies
Hodges
J. Adams
Robinson
F. Rockwell
Crosby
E. Morse
Lovering
Powers
Weeks
Curley
Gallivan
McCormack
Keith
Studds
13th district
Wadsworth
Seaver
Ruggles
Dowse
Eustis
J. Reed Jr.
Randall
Simpkins
Greene
Weeks
Mitchell
Carter
Luce
Wigglesworth
Burke
14th district
G. Thatcher
Cutts
C. King
J. Holmes
Lovering
E. Foss
Harris
Gilmore
Olney
Frothingham
Wigglesworth
Martin
15th district
Wadsworth
Ilsley
Whitman
Widgery
Bradbury
Whitman
Greene
Leach
Martin
Gifford
16th district
S. Thatcher
Cook
Tallman
S. Davis
Brown
Orr
Hill
Thacher
Walsh
Gifford
17th district
Bruce
Chandler
Gannett
F. Carr
Wood
J. Carr
Wilson
Kinsley
18th district
Wilson
T. Rice
J. Parker
19th district
J. Parker
Conner
Gage
Cushman
20th district
Hubbard
Parris
E. Lincoln
At-large
Cobb
vteMassachusetts's delegation(s) to the 80th 86th United States Congress (ordered by seniority)
80th
Senate: 
 L. Saltonstall (R)
 H. C. Lodge Jr. (R)
House: 
 C. Gifford (R)
 J. Martin (R)
 E. N. Rogers (R)
 J. McCormack (D)
 R. Wigglesworth (R)
 C. Clason (R)
 T. Lane (D)
 G. Bates (R)
 A. Goodwin (R)
 C. Herter (R)
 P. Philbin (D)
 J. Heselton (R)
 H. Donohue (D)
 J. F. Kennedy (D)
 D. Nicholson (R)
81st
Senate: 
 L. Saltonstall (R)
 H. C. Lodge Jr. (R)
House: 
 J. Martin (R)
 E. N. Rogers (R)
 J. McCormack (D)
 R. Wigglesworth (R)
 T. Lane (D)
 G. Bates (R)
 A. Goodwin (R)
 C. Herter (R)
 P. Philbin (D)
 J. Heselton (R)
 H. Donohue (D)
 J. F. Kennedy (D)
 D. Nicholson (R)
 F. Furcolo (D)
 W. Bates (R)
82nd
Senate: 
 L. Saltonstall (R)
 H. C. Lodge Jr. (R)
House: 
 J. Martin (R)
 E. N. Rogers (R)
 J. McCormack (D)
 R. Wigglesworth (R)
 T. Lane (D)
 A. Goodwin (R)
 C. Herter (R)
 P. Philbin (D)
 J. Heselton (R)
 H. Donohue (D)
 J. F. Kennedy (D)
 D. Nicholson (R)
 F. Furcolo (D)
 W. Bates (R)
83rd
Senate: 
 L. Saltonstall (R)
 J. F. Kennedy (D)
House: 
 J. Martin (R)
 E. N. Rogers (R)
 J. McCormack (D)
 R. Wigglesworth (R)
 T. Lane (D)
 A. Goodwin (R)
 P. Philbin (D)
 J. Heselton (R)
 H. Donohue (D)
 D. Nicholson (R)
 W. Bates (R)
 E. Boland (D)
 L. Curtis (R)
 T. O'Neill (D)
84th
Senate: 
 L. Saltonstall (R)
 J. F. Kennedy (D)
House: 
 J. Martin (R)
 E. N. Rogers (R)
 J. McCormack (D)
 R. Wigglesworth (R)
 T. Lane (D)
 P. Philbin (D)
 J. Heselton (R)
 H. Donohue (D)
 D. Nicholson (R)
 W. Bates (R)
 E. Boland (D)
 L. Curtis (R)
 T. O'Neill (D)
 T. Macdonald (D)
85th
Senate: 
 L. Saltonstall (R)
 J. F. Kennedy (D)
House: 
 J. Martin (R)
 E. N. Rogers (R)
 J. McCormack (D)
 R. Wigglesworth (R)
 T. Lane (D)
 P. Philbin (D)
 J. Heselton (R)
 H. Donohue (D)
 D. Nicholson (R)
 W. Bates (R)
 E. Boland (D)
 L. Curtis (R)
 T. O'Neill (D)
 T. Macdonald (D)
86th
Senate: 
 L. Saltonstall (R)
 J. F. Kennedy (D)
 B. Smith II (D)
House: 
 J. Martin (R)
 E. N. Rogers (R)
 J. McCormack (D)
 T. Lane (D)
 P. Philbin (D)
 H. Donohue (D)
 W. Bates (R)
 E. Boland (D)
 L. Curtis (R)
 T. O'Neill (D)
 T. Macdonald (D)
 S. Conte (R)
 J. Burke (D)
 H. Keith (R)
vteCold War
USA
USSR
NATO
Warsaw Pact
ANZUS
SEATO
METO
Rio Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
1940s
Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Jamaican political conflict
Dekemvriana
Soviet stance in the Warsaw Uprising
Percentages agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states
Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Downfall
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Indonesian National Revolution
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
1947 Polish legislative election
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 crises
Partition of India
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 1948
1947 1949 Palestine war
1947 1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab Israeli War
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
Marshall Plan
Comecon
1948 Czechoslovak coup d' tat
Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council
Al-Wathbah uprising
Tito Stalin split
Berlin Blockade
Annexation of Hyderabad
Madiun Affair
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Malayan Emergency
March 1949 Syrian coup d' tat
Operation Valuable
1950s
Bamboo Curtain
McCarthyism
Korean War
Arab Cold War (1952 1979)
Egyptian revolution of 1952
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Mau Mau rebellion
East German uprising of 1953
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Pact of Madrid
Bricker Amendment
1954 Syrian coup d' tat
Petrov Affair
Domino theory
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d' tat
Capture of the Tuapse
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Jebel Akhdar War
Algerian War
Kashmir Princess
Bandung Conference
Geneva Summit (1955)
Vietnam War
Cyprus Emergency
"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"
1956 Pozna  protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Polish October
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Sputnik crisis
Ifni War
Iraqi 14 July Revolution
1958 Lebanon crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
Laotian Civil War
Kitchen Debate
Cuban Revolution
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
1960s
Congo Crisis
Simba rebellion
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d' tat
Albanian Soviet split
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Annexation of Goa
Papua conflict
Indonesia Malaysia confrontation
Sand War
Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence
Cuban Missile Crisis
El Porte azo
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Ramadan Revolution
Eritrean War of Independence
North Yemen Civil War
1963 Syrian coup d' tat
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Aden Emergency
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Shifta War
Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre
Guatemalan Civil War
Colombian conflict
1964 Brazilian coup d' tat
Dominican Civil War
Rhodesian Bush War
Indonesian mass killings of 1965 1966
Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)
ASEAN Declaration
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
Cultural Revolution
Argentine Revolution
South African Border War
Korean DMZ Conflict
12-3 incident
Greek junta
1967 Hong Kong riots
Years of Lead (Italy)
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Al-Wadiah War
Nigerian Civil War
Protests of 1968
May 68
Prague Spring
USS Pueblo incident
1968 Polish political crisis
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
17 July Revolution
1968 Peruvian coup d' tat
Revolutionary Government
1969 Sudanese coup d' tat
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
1970s
D tente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September
Alcora Exercise
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Western Sahara conflict
Cambodian Civil War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1970 Polish protests
Koza riot
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 JVP insurrection
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1971 Sudanese coup d' tat
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972
Yemenite War of 1972
Munich massacre
1972 1975 Bangladesh insurgency
Eritrean Civil Wars
1973 Uruguayan coup d' tat
1973 Afghan coup d' tat
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
1973 oil crisis
Carnation Revolution
Spanish transition to democracy
Metapolitefsi
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Angolan Civil War
Cambodian genocide
June 1976 protests
Mozambican Civil War
Oromo conflict
Ogaden War
1978 Somali coup d' tat attempt
Western Sahara War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Third Indochina War
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Operation Condor
Dirty War (Argentina)
1976 Argentine coup d' tat
Egyptian Libyan War
German Autumn
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Nicaraguan Revolution
Uganda Tanzania War
NDF Rebellion
Chadian Libyan War
Yemenite War of 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
Sino-Vietnamese War
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
1980s
Salvadoran Civil War
Soviet Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
Gera Demands
Peruvian Revolution
Gda sk Agreement
Solidarity
Eritrean Civil Wars
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Ugandan Bush War
Gulf of Sidra incident
Martial law in Poland
Casamance conflict
Falklands War
1982 Ethiopian Somali Border War
Ndogboyosoi War
United States invasion of Grenada
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
1985 Geneva Summit
Iran Iraq War
Somali Rebellion
Reykjav k Summit
1986 Black Sea incident
South Yemen Civil War
Toyota War
1987 Lieyu massacre
Operation INFEKTION
1987 1989 JVP insurrection
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
8888 Uprising
Solidarity (Soviet reaction)
Contras
Central American crisis
Operation RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Bougainville conflict
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
Afghan Civil War
United States invasion of Panama
1988 Polish strikes
Polish Round Table Agreement
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Peaceful Revolution
1990s
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Gulf War
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup
Frozen conflicts
Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Kinmen Agreement
IdeologiesCapitalism
Liberalism
Chicago school
Keynesianism
Libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Democratic capitalism
Socialism
Communism
Marxism Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Maoism
Trotskyism
Stalinism
Titoism
Other
Imperialism
Anti-imperialism
Nationalism
Ultranationalism
Chauvinism
Ethnic nationalism
Racism
Zionism
Anti-Zionism
Fascism
Neo-Nazism
Islamism
Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Guided democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy
White nationalism
White separatism
Apartheid
Organizations
NATO
SEATO
METO
EEC
Warsaw Pact
Comecon
Non-Aligned Movement
NN States
ASEAN
SAARC
Safari Club
PropagandaPro-communist
Active measures
Izvestia
Neues Deutschland
Pravda
Rud  pr vo
Trybuna Ludu
TASS
Soviet Life
Pro-Western
Amerika
Crusade for Freedom
Paix et Libert 
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Radio Free Asia
Red Scare
Voice of America
Technologicalcompetition
Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Historians
Gar Alperovitz
Thomas A. Bailey
Michael Beschloss
Archie Brown
Warren H. Carroll
Adrian Cioroianu
John Costello
Michael Cox
Nicholas J. Cull
Norman Davies
Willem Drees
Robert D. English
Herbert Feis
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Andr  Fontaine
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
John Lewis Gaddis
Lloyd Gardner
Timothy Garton Ash
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Fred Halliday
Jussi Hanhim ki
John Earl Haynes
Patrick J. Hearden
Tvrtko Jakovina
Tony Judt
Harvey Klehr
Gabriel Kolko
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Melvyn P. Leffler
Geir Lundestad
Vojtech Mastny
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Thomas J. McCormick
Timothy Naftali
Marius Oprea
David S. Painter
William B. Pickett
Ronald E. Powaski
Yakov M. Rabkin
Mary Elise Sarotte
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Ellen Schrecker
Giles Scott-Smith
Shen Zhihua
Timothy D. Snyder
Athan Theoharis
Andrew Thorpe
Vladimir Tism neanu
Patrick Vaughan
Alex von Tunzelmann
Odd Arne Westad
William Appleman Williams
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Rudolph Winnacker
Ken Young
Espionage andintelligence
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
Soviet espionage in the United States
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CIA
MI5
MI6
United States involvement in regime change
Soviet involvement in regime change
MVD
KGB
Stasi
See also
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet Union United States relations
Soviet Union United States summits
Russia NATO relations
War on terror
Brinkmanship
Second Cold War
Russian Revolution
Category
List of conflicts
Timeline
vteBuddhist crisisEvents
Hu  Ph t  n (Vesak) shootings
Hue chemical attacks
Self-immolation of Th ch Qu ng  c
Double Seven Day scuffle
X  L i Pagoda raids
1963 South Vietnamese coup (reaction)
Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem
Policy
Joint Communiqu 
Cable 243
Krulak Mendenhall mission
McNamara Taylor mission
Political orreligiousfigures
Bui Van Luong
B u H i
Th ch Qu ng  c
Michael Forrestal
W. Averell Harriman
Roger Hilsman
Thich Thien Hoa
John F. Kennedy
Thich Tinh Khiet
Victor H. Krulak
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Robert McNamara
Joseph Mendenhall
Ng   nh C n
Ng   nh Di m
Ng   nh Nhu 
Ng   nh Th c
Nguy n Ng c Th 
Nguy n  nh Thu n
Madame Nhu
Frederick Nolting
Th ch Tr  Quang
Maxwell D. Taylor
Tr n V n Ch ng
William Trueheart
V  V n M u
Militaryfigures
Lucien Conein
  Cao Tr 
  M u
D ng V n Minh
Hu nh V n Cao
L  Quang Tung
L  V n Kim
Nguy n H u C 
Nguy n Kh nh
Nguy n V n Nhung
Nguy n V n Thi u
Ph m Ng c Th o
T n Th t  nh
Tr n Kim Tuy n
Tr n Thi n Khi m
Tr n V n  n
Journalists
Peter Arnett
Malcolm Browne
David Halberstam
Marguerite Higgins
Neil Sheehan
Related
Persecution of Buddhists
vtePT-109Craft
PT boat
PT-109
PT-59
Japanese destroyer Amagiri
People
John F. Kennedy
Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana
Reg Evans
Andrew Kirksey and Harold Marney
Media
1962 Song
1963 Film
1987 Video game
The Search for Kennedy's PT 109 (2002 film)
PT 109: An American Epic of War, Survival, and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy (2015 book)
Related
Kasolo Island (Kennedy Island)
vteRobert F. KennedyNovember 20, 1925   June 6, 1968
64th United States Attorney General, 1961 1964
United States senator from New York, 1965 1968
Life
1948 Palestine visit
Senate Committee investigation of Labor and Management
Cuban Missile Crisis
ExComm
Civil rights
Freedom Riders
Voter Education Project
Baldwin Kennedy meeting
1964 Democratic National Convention
Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation
Mississippi Delta tour
Kennedy Compound
Hickory Hill home
Electoral
1964 U.S. Senate election
1968 presidential campaign
primaries
Boiler Room Girls
Speeches
Law Day Address (1961)
Day of Affirmation Address (1966)
Conflict in Vietnam and at Home (1968)
University of Kansas (1968)
Ball State (1968)
On the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. (1968)
"On the Mindless Menace of Violence" (1968)
Books
The Enemy Within (1960)
The Pursuit of Justice (1964)
To Seek a Newer World (1967)
Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis (1969)
Assassination
Sirhan Sirhan
Ambassador Hotel
Conspiracy theories
Gravesite
Legacy andmemorials
Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building
Robert F. Kennedy silver dollar
Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights
Human Rights Award
Journalism Award
Book Award
Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium
Brooklyn Memorial
Landmark for Peace Memorial
Kennedy King College
Robert F. Kennedy Community Schools
Robert F. Kennedy Bridge
Popularculture
Crisis: Behind a Presidential Commitment (1963 documentary)
Robert Kennedy Remembered (1968 documentary)
"Abraham, Martin and John" (1968 song)
The Missiles of October (1974 docudrama)
Kennedy (1983 miniseries)
Blood Feud (1983 film)
Prince Jack (1985 film)
Robert Kennedy and His Times (1985 miniseries)
Hoover vs. The Kennedys (1987 miniseries)
Thirteen Days (2000 film)
RFK (2002 film)
Bobby (2006 film)
RFK Must Die (2007 documentary)
The Kennedys (2011 miniseries)
Ethel (2012 documentary)
Jackie (2016 film)
Bobby Kennedy for President (2018 miniseries)
Family,family tree
Ethel Skakel (wife)
Kathleen Kennedy (daughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy (son)
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (son)
David Kennedy (son)
Michael Kennedy (son)
Kerry Kennedy (daughter)
Chris Kennedy (son)
Max Kennedy (son)
Doug Kennedy (son)
Rory Kennedy (daughter)
Maeve Kennedy McKean (granddaughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy III (grandson)
Max Kennedy Jr. (grandson)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Kennedy (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
John F. Kennedy (brother
presidency)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Kennedy Cavendish (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Ted Kennedy (brother)
Patrick J. Kennedy (grandfather)
Mary Augusta Kennedy (grandmother)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)
 Category
vteTed KennedyFebruary 22, 1932   August 25, 2009
United States Senator from Massachusetts, 1962 2009Electoralhistory
U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1962 (special)
1964
1970
1976
1982
1988
1994
2000
2006
1980 United States presidential election (Democratic primaries)
Ted Kennedy 1980 presidential campaign
Books
My Senator and Me: A Dog's-Eye View of Washington, D.C. (2006)
True Compass (2009)
Speeches
The Dream Shall Never Die
Family,family tree
Joan Bennett Kennedy (first wife)
Victoria Reggie Kennedy (second wife, widow)
Kara Kennedy (daughter)
Edward M. Kennedy Jr. (son)
Patrick J. Kennedy II (son)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Kennedy (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
John F. Kennedy (brother
presidency)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Kennedy (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Robert F. Kennedy (brother)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Patrick J. Kennedy I (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)
Related
Awards and honors
Political positions
Kennedy Compound
Edward M. Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate
Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act
Chappaquiddick incident
Mary Jo Kopechne
Friends of Ireland
Chappaquiddick (2018 film)
 Category
vteKennedy familyI.P. J. Kennedy (1858 1929)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (m.) Rose Fitzgerald
II.Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (1888 1969)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr.
John F. Kennedy (m.) Jacqueline Bouvier
Rosemary Kennedy
Kathleen Kennedy (m.) William Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington
Eunice Kennedy (m.) Sargent Shriver
Patricia Kennedy (m./div.) Peter Lawford
Robert F. Kennedy (m.) Ethel Skakel
Jean Kennedy (m.) Stephen Edward Smith
Edward M. "Ted" Kennedy (m./div. 1st) Joan Bennett; (m. 2nd) Victoria Reggie
III.John F. Kennedy (1917 1963)
Caroline Kennedy (m.) Edwin Schlossberg
John F. Kennedy Jr. (m.) Carolyn Bessette
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (1921 2009)
Bobby Shriver
Maria Shriver (m./div.) Arnold Schwarzenegger
Timothy Shriver
Mark Shriver
Anthony Shriver
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (1924 2006)
Christopher Lawford
Robert F. Kennedy (1925 1968)
Kathleen Kennedy Townsend
Joseph P. Kennedy II
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (m./sep.) Mary Richardson (m. 3rd) Cheryl Hines
David A. Kennedy
Michael LeMoyne Kennedy
Kerry Kennedy (m./div.) Andrew Cuomo
Christopher G. Kennedy
Max Kennedy
Douglas Harriman Kennedy
Rory Kennedy (m.) Mark Bailey
Jean Kennedy Smith (1928 2020)
William Kennedy Smith
Ted Kennedy (1932 2009)
Kara Kennedy
Edward M. Kennedy Jr.
Patrick J. Kennedy (m.) Amy Kennedy
V.
Rose Schlossberg
Tatiana Schlossberg (m.) George Moran
Jack Schlossberg
Katherine Schwarzenegger (m.) Chris Pratt
Patrick Schwarzenegger
Joseph P. Kennedy III
Maeve Kennedy McKean
Max Kennedy Jr.
Related
Hickory Hill
Kennedy Compound
Kennedy curse
Merchandise Mart
The Kennedys (museum)
The Kennedys (miniseries)
The Kennedys: After Camelot
CategoryKennedy familym. = married; div. = divorced; sep. = separated.
vte(  1952)   1956 United States presidential election   (  1960)Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower
Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon
Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II
VP nominee: Estes Kefauver
Other candidates: John S. Battle
Happy Chandler
James C. Davis
W. Averell Harriman
Lyndon B. Johnson
Frank Lausche
George Bell Timmerman Jr.
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton
VP nominee: Symon Gould
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick 
VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Eric Hass
VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Party
Nominee: Darlington Hoopes
VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
T. Coleman Andrews
Gerald L. K. Smith
Other 1956 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1956)   1960 United States presidential election   (  1964)Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: John F. Kennedy
campaign
VP nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson
Other candidates
Ross Barnett
Pat Brown
Michael DiSalle
Paul C. Fisher
Hubert Humphrey
Lyndon B. Johnson
George H. McLain
Robert B. Meyner
Wayne Morse
Albert S. Porter
Adlai Stevenson II
George Smathers
Stuart Symington
Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Richard Nixon
VP nominee: Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Other candidates
Barry Goldwater
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
James M. Lloyd
Nelson Rockefeller
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee
Symon Gould
National States' Rights Party
Nominee
Orval Faubus
VP nominee
J. B. Stoner
Prohibition Party
Nominee
Rutherford Decker
VP nominee
E. Harold Munn
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee
Eric Hass
VP nominee
Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee
Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee
Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
Harry F. Byrd
Merritt B. Curtis
Lar Daly
George Lincoln Rockwell
Charles L. Sullivan
Other 1960 elections: House
Senate
vteCabinet of President John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)CabinetVice President
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961 1963)
Secretary of State
Dean Rusk (1961 1963)
Secretary of the Treasury
C. Douglas Dillon (1961 1963)
Secretary of Defense
Robert McNamara (1961 1963)
Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Postmaster General
J. Edward Day (1961 1963)
John A. Gronouski (1963)
Secretary of the Interior
Stewart Udall (1961 1963)
Secretary of Agriculture
Orville Freeman (1961 1963)
Secretary of Commerce
Luther H. Hodges (1961 1963)
Secretary of Labor
Arthur Goldberg (1961 1962)
W. Willard Wirtz (1962 1963)
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
Abraham Ribicoff (1961 1962)
Anthony J. Celebrezze  (1962 1963)
Cabinet-levelAmbassador to the United Nations
Adlai Stevenson II (1961 1963)
vteTime Persons of the Year1927 1950
Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)
1951 1975
Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II  (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segr  / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward  (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
 The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell  (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
 American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt  (1975)
1976 2000
Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wa sa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin  (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeff Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)
2001 present
Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins  (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
 The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates  (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
 Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah  (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)
 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital  (2018)
Greta Thunberg (2019)
Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020)
Elon Musk (2021)
Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022)
vtePulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography (1951 1975)
Margaret Louise Coit (1951)
Merlo J. Pusey (1952)
David J. Mays (1953)
Charles A. Lindbergh (1954)
William S. White (1955)
Talbot Faulkner Hamlin (1956)
John F. Kennedy (1957)
Douglas Southall Freeman, John Alexander Carroll and Mary Wells Ashworth (1958)
Arthur Walworth (1959)
Samuel Eliot Morison (1960)
David Donald (1961)
Leon Edel (1963)
Walter Jackson Bate (1964)
Ernest Samuels (1965)
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (1966)
Justin Kaplan (1967)
George Frost Kennan (1968)
Benjamin Lawrence Reid (1969)
Thomas Harry Williams (1970)
Lawrance Thompson  (1971)
Joseph P. Lash (1972)
W. A. Swanberg (1973)
Louis Sheaffer (1974)
Robert Caro (1975)
Complete list
(1917 1925)
(1926 1950)
(1951 1975)
(1976 2000)
(2001 2025)
vteNational Football Foundation Gold Medal winners
1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower
1959: Douglas MacArthur
1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg
1961: John F. Kennedy
1962: Byron "Whizzer" White
1963: Roger Blough
1964: Donold B. Lourie
1965: Juan T. Trippe
1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik
1967: Frederick L. Hovde
1968: Chester J. LaRoche
1969: Richard Nixon
1970: Thomas J. Hamilton
1971: Ronald Reagan
1972: Gerald Ford
1973: John Wayne
1974: Gerald B. Zornow
1975: David Packard
1976: Edgar B. Speer
1977: Louis H. Wilson
1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy
1979: William P. Lawrence
1980: Walter J. Zable
1981: Justin W. Dart
1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown, Willie Davis,  Jack Kemp, Ron Kramer, Jim Swink
1983: Jack Kemp
1984: John F. McGillicuddy
1985: William I. Spencer
1986: William H. Morton
1987: Charles R. Meyer
1988: Clinton E. Frank
1989: Paul Brown
1990: Thomas H. Moorer
1991: George H. W. Bush
1992: Donald R. Keough
1993: Norman Schwarzkopf
1994: Thomas S. Murphy
1995: Harold Alfond
1996: Gene Corrigan
1997: Jackie Robinson
1998: John H. McConnell
1999: Keith Jackson
2000: Fred M. Kirby II
2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs
2002: George Steinbrenner
2003: Tommy Franks
2004: William V. Campbell
2005: Jon F. Hanson
2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden
2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach
2008: John Glenn
2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman
2010: Bill Cosby
2011: Robert Gates
2012: Roscoe Brown
2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell
2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss
2015: Condoleezza Rice
2016: Archie Manning
2017: None awarded
2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman
2019: Mark Harmon
vteAssassination of John F. Kennedy
John F. Kennedy
Lee Harvey Oswald
Assassination
Assassination rifle
Timeline
J. D. Tippit
John Connally
Nellie Connally
Jacqueline Kennedy
Pink Chanel suit
James Tague
William Greer
Roy Kellerman
Clint Hill
Zapruder film
Abraham Zapruder
Dealey Plaza
Texas School Book Depository
Sixth Floor Museum
Presidential limousine
Parkland Hospital
Witnesses
Marie Muchmore
Orville Nix
Three tramps
Babushka Lady
Badge Man
Umbrella man
Aftermath
Autopsy
Reactions
Johnson inauguration
Jack Ruby
Ruby v. Texas
Dictabelt recording
Conspiracy theories
CIA
Single-bullet theory
1992 Assassination Records Act
In popular culture
Robert N. McClelland (surgeon)
Charles Baxter (physician)
Malcolm Perry (physician)
Earl Rose (coroner)
Dallas memorial
State funeral
Foreign dignitaries
Burial site and Eternal Flame
Black Jack (horse)
Investigations
Warren Commission
Jim Garrison investigation
House Select Committee on Assassinations
Researchers
Category
vtePacem in Terris Peace and Freedom Award laureates1960s
1964: John Howard Griffin / John F. Kennedy
1965: Martin Luther King Jr.
1966: R. Sargent Shriver
1967: A. Philip Randolph
1968: James Groppi
1969: Saul Alinsky
1970s
1971: Dorothy Day
1974: Harold Hughes
1975: H lder C mara
1976: Mother Teresa
1979: Thomas Gumbleton
1980s
1980: Crystal Lee Sutton / Ernest Leo Unterkoefler
1982: George F. Kennan
1983: Helen Caldicott
1985: Joseph Bernardin
1986: Maurice John Dingman
1987: Desmond Tutu
1989: Eileen Egan
1990s
1990: Mairead Maguire
1991: Mar a Julia Hern ndez
1992: C sar Ch vez
1993: Daniel Berrigan
1995: Jim Wallis
1996: Samuel Ruiz
1997: Jim and Shelley Douglass
2000s
2000: George G. Higgins
2001: Lech Wa sa
2002: Gwen Hennessey / Dorothy Hennessey
2004: Arthur Simon
2005: Donald Mosley
2007: Salim Ghazal
2008: Marvin Mottet
2009: Hildegard Goss-Mayr
2010s
2010: John Dear
2011:  lvaro Leonel Ramazzini Imeri
2012: Kim Bobo
2013: Jean Vanier
2014: Simone Campbell
2015: Th ch Nh t H nh
2016: Gustavo Guti rrez
2017: Widad Akreyi
2019: Dalai Lama
2019: Munib Younan
2020s
2022: Norma Pimentel
vteLain in state (United States)Lain in stateUS Capitol rotunda
Clay (1852)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
Stevens (1868)
Sumner (1874)
Wilson (1875)
Garfield (1881)
Logan (1886)
McKinley (1901)
L'Enfant (1909)
Dewey (1917)
Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921)
Harding (1923)
W. H. Taft (1930)
Pershing (1948)
R. A. Taft (1953)
Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
MacArthur (1964)
H. Hoover (1964)
Eisenhower (1969)
Dirksen (1969)
J. E. Hoover (1972)
Johnson (1973)
Humphrey (1978)
Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984)
Pepper (1989)
Reagan (2004, funeral)
Ford (2006 07, funeral)
Inouye (2012)
McCain (2018)
Bush (2018, funeral)
Lewis (2020)
Dole (2021)
Reid (2022)
National Statuary Hall
Cummings (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Young (2022)
House Chamber
Hooper (1875)
Herbert C. Hoover Building
Brown (1996)
Old Senate Chamber
Chase (1873)
Lain in honorUS Capitol rotunda
Chestnut and Gibson (1998)
Parks (2005)
Graham (2018)
Sicknick (2021)
Evans (2021)
Williams (2022)
Lain in reposeEast Room
Harrison (1841)
Taylor (1850)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
McKinley (1901)
Harding (1923)
Roosevelt (1945)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
Great Hall of theUS Supreme Court
Warren (1974)
Marshall (1993)
Burger (1995)
Brennan (1997)
Blackmun (1999)
Rehnquist (2005)
Scalia (2016)
Stevens (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Senate Chamber
Byrd (2010)
Lautenberg (2013)
Bold: Presidents and chief justices
Portals: 1960s Biography Catholicism Liberalism Politics United States World War II
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
RKD Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
SNAC
2
3
4
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_F._Kennedy&oldid=1149552043"