1990 1991 war between Iraq and American-led coalition forces
This article is about the conflict against Iraq in 1990 1991. For other conflicts with the same name, see Gulf War (disambiguation).
"Desert Storm" redirects here. For other uses, see Desert Storm (disambiguation).
Gulf WarClockwise from top: USAF F-15Es, F-16s, and an F-15C flying over burning Kuwaiti oil wells; British troops from the Staffordshire Regiment in Operation Granby; camera view from a Lockheed AC-130; the Highway of Death; M728 Combat Engineer VehicleDate2 August 1990  17 January 1991(Operation Desert Shield)17 January 1991  28 February 1991(Operation Desert Storm)(6 months, 3 weeks and 5 days)LocationIraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Israel, and the Persian GulfResult
Coalition victory
Expulsion of Iraqi military forces from Kuwait
Kuwaiti independence restored
Destruction of Kuwaiti and Iraqi infrastructure
Iraq launches missiles against Saudi Arabian targets
Iraqi rocket attacks on Israel
Establishment of Iraqi no-fly zones
Sanctions against Iraq imposed by the United Nations Security Council
UNSC Resolution 687 establishes ceasefire terms; beginning of the Iraq disarmament crisis
UNSC Resolution 689 establishes the United Nations Iraq Kuwait Observation Mission to monitor the international border between Iraq and Kuwait
Ba'athist government retains power in Iraq
Beginning of Iraqi anti-government uprisings
Expulsion of Palestinians from KuwaitTerritorialchanges
State of Kuwait resumes self-governance over all Kuwaiti sovereign territory
Establishment of a demilitarized zone and construction of a separation barrier along the Iraq Kuwait borderBelligerents
 United States United Kingdom France Saudi Arabia Egypt Kuwait
Coalition:
  Afghan mujahideen[1]
  Argentina
  Australia
  Bahrain
  Bangladesh
  Belgium
  Canada
  Czechoslovakia
  Denmark[2]
  Germany
  Greece
  Honduras
  Hungary
  Italy
  Japan
  Morocco
  Netherlands
  New Zealand
  Niger
  Norway
  Oman
  Pakistan
  Poland
  Portugal
  Qatar
  Senegal
  Sierra Leone
  Singapore
  South Korea
  Spain
  Sweden
  Syria
  Turkey[3]
  United Arab Emirates
 IraqCommanders and leaders
 George Bush
 Dan Quayle
 Dick Cheney
 Colin Powell
 Norman Schwarzkopf
 John J. Yeosock
 Walter E. Boomer
 Charles Horner
 Stanley Arthur
 Robert B. Johnston
 Margaret Thatcher
 John Major
 Peter de la Billi re
 Fran ois Mitterrand
 Michel Roquejeoffre
 Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad
 Sheikh Saad Al Abdullah
 King Fahd
 Prince Abdullah
 Prince Sultan
 Saleh Al-Muhaya
 Khalid bin Sultan[4][5]
 Prince Nayef
 Prince Badr
 Prince Turki Al Faisal
 Hosni Mubarak
 Youssef Sabri Abu Taleb
 Salah Halabi
 M. H. Tantawi
 Saddam Hussein
 Tariq Aziz
 Ali Hassan al-Majid
 Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri
 Hussein Kamel al-Majid
 Abid Hamid Mahmud
 Muzahim Saab Hassan
 Salah Aboud Mahmoud
Strength
956,600, including 700,000 U.S. troops[6][7]
650,000 soldiersCasualties and losses
Coalition:292 killed (147 killed by enemy action, 145 non-hostile deaths)467 wounded in action776 wounded[8]31 tanks destroyed/disabled[9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16]28 Bradley IFVs destroyed/damaged[17][18]1 M113 APC destroyed2 British Warrior APCs destroyed1 artillery piece destroyed75 aircraft destroyed[citation needed]Kuwait:420 killed
12,000 captured
 200 tanks destroyed/captured
850+ other armored vehicles destroyed/captured
57 aircraft lost
8 aircraft captured (Mirage F1s)
17 ships sunk, 6 captured[19]
Iraqi:20,000 50,000 killed[20][21]75,000+ wounded[8] 80,000 175,000 captured[20][22][23]3,300 tanks destroyed[20]2,100 APCs destroyed[20]2,200 artillery pieces destroyed[20]110 aircraft destroyed[citation needed]137 aircraft flown to Iran to escape destruction[citation needed]19 ships sunk, 6 damaged[citation needed]
Kuwaiti civilian losses:Over 1,000 killed[24]600 missing people[25]Iraqi civilian losses:3,664 killed[26]Other civilian losses:75 killed in Israel and Saudi Arabia, 309 injuredvtePersian Gulf Wars
Iran Iraq War (1980 1988)
Gulf War (1990 1991)
Invasion of Kuwait (1990)
Iraqi Kurdish/Shi'a uprisings (1991)
Iraq no-fly zones conflict (1991 2003)
Iraq air strikes (January 1993)
Iraq missile strikes (1993)
Iraq missile strikes (1996)
Iraq bombing (1998)
1999 Shia uprising in Iraq
Iraqi conflict (2003 present)
Iraq War (2003 2011)
Iraqi insurgency (2003 2006)
Iraqi civil war (2006 2008)
Iraqi insurgency (2008 2011)
Iraqi insurgency (2011 2013)
War in Iraq (2013 2017)
Islamic State insurgency in Iraq (2017 present)
vteGulf WarInvasion of Kuwait
Kuwaiti Bridges
Dasman Palace
Failaka
British Airways Flight 149
Coalition intervention
Khafji
Wadi al-Batin
Naval operations
Ad-Dawrah
Qurah
Maradim
Bubiyan
Air campaign
Air to Air combat
"Package Q" Air Strike
Ras Tanura
Samurra
Amiriyah
Liberation of Kuwait
Order of battle
67 Easting
73 Easting
Al Busayyah
Phase Line Bullet
Medina Ridge
Highway of Death
Jalibah
Norfolk
Kuwait International Airport
Post-ceasefire
Rumaila
Safwan
Part of a series onBa'athism
OrganisationsArab Ba'ath1940 1947Arab Ba'ath Movement1940 1947Ba'ath Party1947 1966Baath Party (pro-Iraqi)1968 2003Baath Party (pro-Syrian)1966 present
People
Zaki al-Arsuzi
Michel Aflaq
Salah al-Din al-Bitar
Abdullah Rimawi
Wahib al-Ghanim
Fuad al-Rikabi
Salah Jadid
Hafez al-Assad
Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr
Saddam Hussein
Bashar al-Assad
Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri
Literature
On the Way of Resurrection
The Battle for One Destiny
The Genius of Arabic in Its Tongue
History
Ba'athist IraqRamadan Revolution
November 1963 coup d' tat
17 July Revolution
Iran Iraq War
Gulf War
UN sanctions
Iraq War
De-Ba'athification
Baathist SyriaSyrian Committee to Help Iraq
1963 / 1966 coup d' tats
Corrective Revolution
Intervention in Lebanon
Syrian occupation of Lebanon
Syrian civil war
Regional organisationsAlgeriapro-Iraqpro-SyriaBahrainpro-Iraqpro-SyriaEgyptpro-Iraqpro-SyriaIraqpro-Iraqpro-SyriaJordanpro-Iraqpro-SyriaKuwaitpro-IraqLebanonpro-Iraqpro-SyriaLibyapro-IraqMauritaniapro-Iraqpro-SyriaPalestinepro-Iraqpro-SyriaSudanpro-Iraqpro-SyriaSyriapro-Iraqpro-SyriaTunisiapro-Iraqpro-SyriaYemenpro-Iraqpro-Syria
Splinter groupsArab Socialist Revolutionary Ba'ath Party1960 1962/63Socialist Lebanon1965 1970Arab Revolutionary Workers Party1966 presentDemocratic Socialist Arab Ba'ath Party1970 presentSudanese Ba'ath Party2002 present
Related topics
Arab nationalism
Arab socialism
Nasserism
Pan-Arabism
Politics portalSocialism portalvte
This article is part of a series aboutGeorge H. W. Bush
Family
Electoral history
Pre-vice presidency
U.S. Representative for Texas's 7th
U.S. Ambassador
U.N.
China
Chair of the RNC
Director of Central Intelligence
43rd Vice President of the United States
Transition
Tenure
Reagan administration
first inauguration
second inauguration
Reagan assassination attempt
Deregulation
41st President of the United States
Presidency
timeline
Transition
Inauguration
Policies
Environmental
Foreign
international trips
Pardons
Appointments
Cabinet
Judiciary
Tenure
Thousand points of light
foundation
Invasion of Panama
Gulf War
Operation Restore Hope
NAFTA
Timeline
'89
'90
'91
'92 '93
Presidential campaigns
1980
primaries
convention
1988
primaries
convention
"No new taxes"
debates
election
1992
primaries
convention
debates
election
Post-presidency
Presidential library
Bibliography
Honors and awards
Bush School of Government
Death and state funeral
vte
The Gulf War[b] was a 1990 1991 armed campaign waged by a 39-country military coalition in response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Spearheaded by the United States, the coalition's efforts against Iraq were carried out in two key phases: Operation Desert Shield, which marked the military buildup from August 1990 to January 1991; and Operation Desert Storm, which began with the aerial bombing campaign against Iraq on 17 January 1991 and came to a close with the American-led Liberation of Kuwait on 28 February 1991.
On 2 August 1990, Iraq invaded neighbouring Kuwait,[27] and had fully occupied the country within two days. Initially, Iraq ran the occupied territory under a puppet government known as the "Republic of Kuwait" before proceeding with an outright annexation in which Kuwaiti sovereign territory was split, with the "Saddamiyat al-Mitla' District" being carved out of the country's northern portion and the "Kuwait Governorate" covering the rest. Varying speculations have been made regarding the true intents behind the Iraqi invasion, most notably including Iraq's inability to repay the debt of more than US$14 billion that it had borrowed from Kuwait to finance its military efforts during the Iran Iraq War. Kuwait's demands for repayment were coupled with its surge in petroleum production levels, which kept revenues down for Iraq and further weakened its economic prospects;[28] throughout much of the 1980s, Kuwait's oil production was above its mandatory quota under OPEC, which kept international oil prices down.[29] Iraq interpreted the Kuwaiti refusal to decrease oil production as an act of aggression towards the Iraqi economy, leading up to the hostilities.[30] The invasion of Kuwait was immediately met with international condemnation, including in Resolution 660 by the United Nations Security Council (UNSC),[31] which unanimously imposed economic sanctions against Iraq in Resolution 661. British prime minister Margaret Thatcher[32] and American president George H. W. Bush deployed troops and equipment into Saudi Arabia and openly urged other countries to send their own forces to the scene. In response to the joint call, an array of countries joined the American-led coalition, forming the largest military alliance since World War II. The bulk of the coalition's military power was from the United States, with Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom, and Egypt as the largest lead-up contributors, in that order; Saudi Arabia and the Kuwaiti government-in-exile paid around US$32 billion of the US$60 billion cost to mobilize the coalition against Iraq.[33]
UNSC Resolution 678 adopted on 29 November 1990 offered Iraq one final chance until 15 January 1991 to implement Resolution 660 and withdraw from Kuwait; it further empowered states after the deadline to use "all necessary means" to force Iraq out of Kuwait.  Initial efforts to dislodge the Iraqi presence in Kuwait began with an aerial and naval bombardment on 17 January 1991, which continued for five weeks. During this time, as the Iraqi military found itself unable to ward off the coalition's attacks, Iraq began to fire missiles at Israel. While the coalition itself did not include Israel, the Iraqi leadership had launched the campaign under the expectation that the missile barrage would provoke an independent Israeli military response, and hoped that such a response would prompt the coalition's Muslim-majority countries to withdraw (see Arab Israeli conflict). However, the jeopardization attempt was ultimately unsuccessful as Israel did not respond to any Iraqi attacks, and Iraq continued to remain at odds with most Muslim-majority countries. Iraqi missile barrages aimed at coalition targets stationed in Saudi Arabia were also largely unsuccessful, and on 24 February 1991, the coalition launched a major ground assault into Iraqi-occupied Kuwait. The offensive was a decisive victory for American-led coalition forces, who liberated Kuwait and promptly began to advance past the Iraq Kuwait border into Iraqi territory. A hundred hours after the beginning of the ground campaign, the coalition ceased its advance into Iraq and declared a ceasefire. Aerial and ground combat was confined to Iraq, Kuwait, and areas straddling the Iraq Saudi Arabia border.
The conflict marked the introduction of live news broadcasts from the front lines of the battle, principally by the American network CNN.[34][35][36] It has also earned the nickname Video Game War, after the daily broadcast of images from cameras onboard American bombers during Operation Desert Storm.[37] The Gulf War has gained notoriety for including three of the largest tank battles in American military history.[38]
Names
The war is also known under other names, such as the Persian Gulf War, First Gulf War, Kuwait War, First Iraq War, or Iraq War[39][40][41][a] before the term "Iraq War" became identified instead with the 2003 Iraq War (also referred to in the U.S. as "Operation Iraqi Freedom").[42] The war was named "the mother of all battles    " by Iraqi officials.[43]
Background
See also: Iran United States relations after 1979, List of modern conflicts in the Middle East, and Rationale for the Persian Gulf war
Throughout the Cold War, Iraq had been an ally of the Soviet Union, and there was a history of friction between Iraq and the United States.[44] The US was concerned with Iraq's position on Israeli Palestinian politics. The US also disliked Iraqi support for Palestinian militant groups, which led to Iraq's inclusion on the developing US list of State Sponsors of Terrorism in December 1979.[45]
The US remained officially neutral after Iraq's invasion of Iran in 1980, which became the Iran Iraq War, although it provided resources, political support, and some "non-military" aircraft to Iraq.[46] In March 1982, Iran began a successful counteroffensive (Operation Undeniable Victory), and the US increased its support for Iraq to prevent Iran from forcing a surrender. In a US bid to open full diplomatic relations with Iraq, the country was removed from the US list of State Sponsors of Terrorism.[47] Ostensibly, this was because of improvement in the regime's record, although former US Assistant Defense Secretary Noel Koch later stated: "No one had any doubts about [the Iraqis'] continued involvement in terrorism ... The real reason was to help them succeed in the war against Iran."[48][49]
With Iraq's newfound success in the war, and the Iranian rebuff of a peace offer in July, arms sales to Iraq reached a record spike in 1982. When Iraqi President Saddam Hussein expelled Abu Nidal to Syria at the US's request in November 1983, the Reagan administration sent Donald Rumsfeld to meet Saddam as a special envoy and to cultivate ties. By the time the ceasefire with Iran was signed in August 1988, Iraq was heavily debt-ridden and tensions within society were rising.[50] Most of its debt was owed to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.[51] Iraq's debts to Kuwait amounted to $14 billion.[52] Iraq pressured both nations to forgive the debts, but they refused.[51]
 Donald Rumsfeld, US special envoy to the Middle East, meets Saddam Hussein on 19 20 December 1983.
The Iraq Kuwait dispute also involved Iraqi claims to Kuwaiti territory.[46] Kuwait had been a part of the Ottoman Empire's province of Basra, something that Iraq claimed made Kuwait rightful Iraqi territory.[53] Kuwait's ruling dynasty, the al-Sabah family, had concluded a protectorate agreement in 1899 that assigned responsibility for Kuwait's foreign affairs to the United Kingdom. The UK drew the border between Kuwait and Iraq in 1922, making Iraq almost entirely landlocked.[46] Kuwait rejected Iraqi attempts to secure further provisions in the region.[53]
Iraq also accused Kuwait of exceeding its OPEC quotas for oil production. In order for the cartel to maintain its desired price of $18 per barrel, discipline was required. The United Arab Emirates and Kuwait were consistently overproducing; the latter at least in part to repair losses caused by Iranian attacks in the Iran Iraq War and to pay for the losses of an economic scandal. The result was a slump in the oil price  as low as $10 per barrel ($63/m3)  with a resulting loss of $7 billion a year to Iraq, equal to its 1989 balance of payments deficit.[54] Resulting revenues struggled to support the government's basic costs, let alone repair Iraq's damaged infrastructure. Jordan and Iraq both looked for more discipline, with little success.[55] The Iraqi government described it as a form of economic warfare,[55] which it claimed was aggravated by Kuwait slant-drilling across the border into Iraq's Rumaila oil field.[56] According to oil workers in the area, Iraq's slant drilling claim was fabricated, as "oil flows easily from the Rumaila field without any need for these techniques."[57] At the same time, Saddam looked for closer ties with those Arab states that had supported Iraq in the war. This move was supported by the US, who believed that Iraqi ties with pro-Western Gulf states would help bring and maintain Iraq inside the US' sphere of influence.[58]
In 1989, it appeared that Saudi Iraqi relations, strong during the war, would be maintained. A pact of non-interference and non-aggression was signed between the countries, followed by a Kuwaiti-Iraqi deal for Iraq to supply Kuwait with water for drinking and irrigation, although a request for Kuwait to lease Iraq Umm Qasr was rejected.[58] Saudi-backed development projects were hampered by Iraq's large debts, even with the demobilization of 200,000 soldiers. Iraq also looked to increase arms production so as to become an exporter, although the success of these projects was also restrained by Iraq's obligations; in Iraq, resentment to OPEC's controls mounted.[59]
Iraq's relations with its Arab neighbors, particularly Egypt, were degraded by mounting violence in Iraq against expatriate groups, who were well-employed during the war, by unemployed Iraqis, among them demobilized soldiers. These events drew little notice outside the Arab world because of fast-moving events directly related to the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe. However, the US did begin to condemn Iraq's human rights record, including the well-known use of torture.[60] The UK also condemned the execution of Farzad Bazoft, a journalist working for the British newspaper The Observer.[46] Following Saddam's declaration that "binary chemical weapons" would be used on Israel if it used military force against Iraq, Washington halted part of its funding.[61] A UN mission to the Israeli-occupied territories, where riots had resulted in Palestinian deaths, was vetoed by the US, making Iraq deeply skeptical of US foreign policy aims in the region, combined with the reliance of the US on Middle Eastern energy reserves.[62]
In early July 1990, Iraq complained about Kuwait's behavior, such as not respecting their quota, and openly threatened to take military action. On the 23rd, the CIA reported that Iraq had moved 30,000 troops to the Iraq-Kuwait border, and the US naval fleet in the Persian Gulf was placed on alert. Saddam believed an anti-Iraq conspiracy was developing  Kuwait had begun talks with Iran, and Iraq's rival Syria had arranged a visit to Egypt.[63] On 15 July 1990, Saddam's government laid out its combined objections to the Arab League, including that policy moves were costing Iraq $1 billion a year, that Kuwait was still using the Rumaila oil field, and that loans made by the UAE and Kuwait could not be considered debts to its "Arab brothers".[63] He threatened force against Kuwait and the UAE, saying: "The policies of some Arab rulers are American ... They are inspired by America to undermine Arab interests and security."[64] The US sent aerial refuelling planes and combat ships to the Persian Gulf in response to these threats.[65] Discussions in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, mediated on the Arab League's behalf by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, were held on 31 July and led Mubarak to believe that a peaceful course could be established.[66]
It was revealed during Saddam Hussein's 2003-2004 interrogation following his capture that in addition to economic disputes, an insulting exchange between the Kuwaiti emir Al Sabah and the Iraqi foreign minister - during which Saddam claimed that the emir stated his intention to turn "every Iraqi woman into a $10 prostitute" by bankrupting the country - was a decisive factor in triggering the Iraqi invasion.[67]
On the 25th, Saddam met with April Glaspie, the US Ambassador to Iraq, in Baghdad. The Iraqi leader attacked American policy with regards to Kuwait and the UAE:
So what can it mean when America says it will now protect its friends? It can only mean prejudice against Iraq. This stance plus maneuvers and statements which have been made has encouraged the UAE and Kuwait to disregard Iraqi rights ... If you use pressure, we will deploy pressure and force. We know that you can harm us although we do not threaten you. But we too can harm you. Everyone can cause harm according to their ability and their size. We cannot come all the way to you in the United States, but individual Arabs may reach you ... We do not place America among the enemies. We place it where we want our friends to be and we try to be friends. But repeated American statements last year made it apparent that America did not regard us as friends.[68]
Glaspie replied:
I know you need funds. We understand that and our opinion is that you should have the opportunity to rebuild your country. But we have no opinion on the Arab-Arab conflicts, like your border disagreement with Kuwait ... Frankly, we can only see that you have deployed massive troops in the south. Normally that would not be any of our business. But when this happens in the context of what you said on your national day, then when we read the details in the two letters of the Foreign Minister, then when we see the Iraqi point of view that the measures taken by the UAE and Kuwait is, in the final analysis, parallel to military aggression against Iraq, then it would be reasonable for me to be concerned.[68]
Saddam stated that he would attempt last-ditch negotiations with the Kuwaitis but Iraq "would not accept death."[68]
According to Glaspie's own account, she stated in reference to the precise border between Kuwait and Iraq, "... that she had served in Kuwait 20 years before; 'then, as now, we took no position on these Arab affairs'."[69] Glaspie similarly believed that war was not imminent.[66]
On 26 July 1990, only a few days before the Iraqi invasion, OPEC officials said that Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates had agreed to a proposal to limit their oil output to 1.5 million barrels (240,000 m3) per day, "down from the nearly 2 million barrels a day they had each been pumping," thus potentially settling differences over oil policy between Kuwait and Iraq.[70]
Invasion of Kuwait
Main articles: Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and Timeline of Gulf War
 Map of Kuwait
The result of the Jeddah talks was an Iraqi demand for $10 billion[71] to cover the lost revenues from Rumaila; Kuwait offered $500 million.[71] The Iraqi response was to immediately order an invasion,[72] which started on 2 August 1990 with the bombing of Kuwait's capital, Kuwait City.
Before the invasion, the Kuwaiti military was believed to have numbered 16,000 men, arranged into three armored, one mechanized infantry and one under-strength artillery brigade.[73] The pre-war strength of the Kuwait Air Force was around 2,200 Kuwaiti personnel, with 80 fixed-wing aircraft and 40 helicopters.[73] In spite of Iraqi saber rattling, Kuwait did not mobilize its force; the army had been stood-down on 19 July,[74] and during the Iraqi invasion many Kuwaiti military personnel were on leave.[citation needed]
 Kuwaiti Armed Forces Chieftain main battle tanks
 Kuwait Air Force McDonnell Douglas A-4KU Skyhawk ground-attack aircraft
By 1988, at the end of the Iran Iraq war, the Iraqi Army was the world's fourth largest army, consisting of 955,000 standing soldiers and 650,000 paramilitary forces in the Popular Army. According to John Childs and Andr  Corvisier, a low estimate shows the Iraqi Army capable of fielding 4,500 tanks, 484 combat aircraft and 232 combat helicopters.[75] According to Michael Knights, a high estimate shows the Iraqi Army capable of fielding one million troops and 850,000 reservists, 5,500 tanks, 3,000 artillery pieces, 700 combat aircraft and helicopters; it held 53 divisions, 20 special-forces brigades, and several regional militias, and had a strong air defense.[76]
Iraqi commandos infiltrated the Kuwaiti border first to prepare for the major units, which began the attack at midnight. The Iraqi attack had two prongs, with the primary attack force driving south straight for Kuwait City down the main highway, and a supporting attack force entering Kuwait farther west, but then turning and driving east, cutting off Kuwait City from the country's southern half. The commander of a Kuwaiti armored battalion, 35th Armoured Brigade, deployed them against the Iraqi attack and conducted a robust defense at the Battle of the Bridges near Al Jahra, west of Kuwait City.[77]
Kuwaiti aircraft scrambled to meet the invading force, but approximately 20% were lost or captured. A few combat sorties were flown against Iraqi ground forces.[78]
 Lion of Babylon main battle tanks, common Iraqi battle tank used in the Gulf War by the Iraqi Army.
The main Iraqi thrust into Kuwait City was conducted by commandos deployed by helicopters and boats to attack the city from the sea, while other divisions seized the airports and two airbases. The Iraqis attacked the Dasman Palace, the Royal Residence of Kuwait's Emir, Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, which was defended by the Emiri Guard supported with M-84 tanks. In the process, the Iraqis killed Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Emir's youngest brother.[citation needed]
 Kuwaiti Armed Forces M-84 main battle tanks
Within 12 hours, most resistance had ended within Kuwait, and the royal family had fled, allowing Iraq to control most of Kuwait.[72] After two days of intense combat, most of the Kuwaiti military were either overrun by the Iraqi Republican Guard, or had escaped to Saudi Arabia. The Emir and key ministers fled south along the highway for refuge in Saudi Arabia. Iraqi ground forces consolidated their control of Kuwait City, then headed south and redeployed along the Saudi border. After the decisive Iraqi victory, Saddam initially installed a puppet regime known as the "Provisional Government of Free Kuwait" before installing his cousin Ali Hassan al-Majid as Kuwait's governor on 8 August.[citation needed]
 An Iraqi Air Force Bell 214ST transport helicopter, after being captured by a US Marine Corps unit at the start of the ground phase of Operation Desert Storm
After the invasion, the Iraqi military looted over $1 billion in banknotes from Kuwait's Central Bank.[79] At the same time, Saddam Hussein made the Kuwaiti dinar equal to the Iraqi dinar, thereby lowering the Kuwaiti currency to one-twelfth of its original value. In response, Sheikh Jaber al-Ahmad al-Sabah ruled the banknotes as invalid and refused to reimburse stolen notes, which became worthless because of a UN embargo. After the conflict ended, many of the stolen banknotes made their way back into circulation. Today, the stolen banknotes are a collectible for numismatists.[80]
Kuwaiti resistance movement
Kuwaitis founded a local armed resistance movement following the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait.[81][82][83] The Kuwaiti resistance's casualty rate far exceeded that of the coalition military forces and Western hostages.[84] The resistance predominantly consisted of ordinary citizens who lacked any form of training and supervision.[84]
Run-up to the war
Diplomatic means
A key element of US political, military and energy economic planning occurred in early 1984. The Iran Iraq war had been going on for five years by that time and both sides sustained significant casualties, reaching into the hundreds of thousands. Within President Ronald Reagan's National Security Council concern was growing that the war could spread beyond the boundaries of the two belligerents. A National Security Planning Group meeting was formed, chaired by then Vice President George H. W. Bush, to review US options. It was determined that the conflict would likely spread into Saudi Arabia and other  Persian Gulf states, but that the United States had little capability to defend the region. Furthermore, it was determined that a prolonged war in the region would induce much higher oil prices and threaten the fragile recovery of the world economy, which was just beginning to gain momentum. On 22 May 1984, President Reagan was briefed on the project conclusions in the Oval Office by William Flynn Martin who had served as the head of the NSC staff that organized the study. (The full declassified presentation can be seen here:[85]) The conclusions were threefold: first, oil stocks needed to be increased among members of the International Energy Agency and, if necessary, released early if the oil market was disrupted; second, the United States needed to beef up the security of friendly Arab states in the region; and third, an embargo should be placed on sales of military equipment to Iran and Iraq. The plan was approved by President Reagan and later affirmed by the G7 leaders headed by the United Kingdom's Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, in the London Summit of 1984. The plan was implemented and became the basis for US preparedness to respond to the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in 1991.[citation needed]
Within hours of the invasion, Kuwait and US delegations requested a meeting of the UN Security Council, which passed Resolution 660, condemning the invasion and demanding a withdrawal of Iraqi troops.[86][clarification needed][87] On 3 August 1990, the Arab League passed its own resolution, which called for a solution to the conflict from within the league, and warned against outside intervention. Iraq and Libya were the only two Arab League states that opposed the resolution for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait; the PLO[c] opposed it as well.[88] The Arab states of Yemen and Jordan  a Western ally which bordered Iraq and relied on the country for economic support[89]  opposed military intervention from non-Arab states.[90] Separately, Sudan, also an Arab League member, aligned itself with Saddam.[89]
On 6 August, Resolution 661 placed economic sanctions on Iraq.[91][86][92] Resolution 665[87] followed soon after, which authorized a naval blockade to enforce the sanctions. It said the "use of measures commensurate to the specific circumstances as may be necessary ... to halt all inward and outward maritime shipping in order to inspect and verify their cargoes and destinations and to ensure strict implementation of resolution 661."[93][94]
 President Bush visiting American troops in Saudi Arabia on Thanksgiving Day, 1990
The US administration had at first been indecisive with an "undertone ... of resignation to the invasion and even adaptation to it as a fait accompli" until the UK's prime minister Margaret Thatcher played a powerful role, reminding the President that appeasement in the 1930s had led to war, that Saddam would have the whole Gulf at his mercy along with 65 percent of the world's oil supply, and famously urging President Bush "not to go wobbly".[32]
Once persuaded, US officials insisted on a total Iraqi pullout from Kuwait, without any linkage to other Middle Eastern problems, accepting the British view that any concessions would strengthen Iraqi influence in the region for years to come.[95]
On 12 August 1990, Saddam "propose[d] that all cases of occupation, and those cases that have been portrayed as occupation, in the region, be resolved simultaneously". Specifically, he called for Israel to withdraw from occupied territories in Palestine, Syria, and Lebanon, Syria to withdraw from Lebanon, and "mutual withdrawals by Iraq and Iran and arrangement for the situation in Kuwait." He also called for a replacement of US troops that mobilized in Saudi Arabia in response to Kuwait's invasion with "an Arab force", as long as that force did not involve Egypt. Additionally, he requested an "immediate freeze of all boycott and siege decisions" and a general normalization of relations with Iraq.[96] From the beginning of the crisis, President Bush was strongly opposed to any "linkage" between Iraq's occupation of Kuwait and the Palestinian issue.[97]
On 23 August, Saddam appeared on state television with Western hostages to whom he had refused exit visas. In the video, he asks a young British boy, Stuart Lockwood, whether he is getting his milk, and goes on to say, through his interpreter, "We hope your presence as guests here will not be for too long. Your presence here, and in other places, is meant to prevent the scourge of war."[98]
Another Iraqi proposal communicated in August 1990 was delivered to US National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft by an unidentified Iraqi official. The official communicated to the White House that Iraq would "withdraw from Kuwait and allow foreigners to leave" provided that the UN lifted sanctions, allowed "guaranteed access to the Persian Gulf through the Kuwaiti islands of Bubiyan and Warbah", and allowed Iraq to "gain full control of the Rumaila oil field that extends slightly into Kuwaiti territory". The proposal also "include[d] offers to negotiate an oil agreement with the United States 'satisfactory to both nations' national security interests,' develop a joint plan 'to alleviate Iraq's economical and financial problems' and 'jointly work on the stability of the gulf.'"[99]
On 29 November 1990, the Security Council passed Resolution 678, which gave Iraq until 15 January 1991 to withdraw from Kuwait, and empowered states to use "all necessary means" to force Iraq out of Kuwait after the deadline.[citation needed]
In December 1990, Iraq made a proposal to withdraw from Kuwait provided that foreign troops left the region and that an agreement was reached regarding the Palestinian problem and the dismantlement of both Israel's and Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. The White House rejected the proposal.[100] The PLO's Yasser Arafat expressed that neither he nor Saddam insisted that solving the Israel Palestine issues should be a precondition to solving the issues in Kuwait, though he did acknowledge a "strong link" between these problems.[101]
Ultimately, the US and UK stuck to their position that there would be no negotiations until Iraq withdrew from Kuwait and that they should not grant Iraq concessions, lest they give the impression that Iraq benefited from its military campaign.[95] Also, when US Secretary of State James Baker met with Tariq Aziz in Geneva, Switzerland, for last minute peace talks in early 1991, Aziz reportedly made no concrete proposals and did not outline any hypothetical Iraqi moves.[102]
On 14 January 1991, France proposed that the UN Security Council call for "a rapid and massive withdrawal" from Kuwait along with a statement to Iraq that Council members would bring their "active contribution" to a settlement of the region's other problems, "in particular, of the Arab Israeli conflict and in particular to the Palestinian problem by convening, at an appropriate moment, an international conference" to assure "the security, stability and development of this region of the world." The French proposal was supported by Belgium (at the moment one of the rotating Council members), Germany, Spain, Italy, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, and several non-aligned states. The US, the UK, and the Soviet Union rejected it; US Ambassador to the UN Thomas Pickering stated that the French proposal was unacceptable, because it went beyond previous Council resolutions on the Iraqi invasion.[103][104][105] France dropped this proposal when it found "no tangible sign of interest" from Baghdad.[106]
Military means
"Operation Desert Shield" redirects here. For the 2006 operation by the Iraqi insurgency, see Operation Desert Shield (Iraq).
 American F-15Es parked in Saudi Arabia during Operation Desert Shield
One of the main concerns in the Western world was the significant threat Iraq posed to Saudi Arabia. Following Kuwait's conquest, the Iraqi Army was within easy striking distance of Saudi oil fields. Control of these fields, along with Kuwaiti and Iraqi reserves, would have given Saddam control over the majority of the world's oil reserves. Iraq also had a number of grievances with Saudi Arabia. The Saudis had lent Iraq some 26 billion dollars during its war with Iran. The Saudis had backed Iraq in that war, as they feared the influence of Shia Iran's Islamic revolution on its own Shia minority. After the war, Saddam felt he should not have to repay the loans due to the help he had given the Saudis by fighting Iran.[citation needed]
Soon after his conquest of Kuwait, Saddam began verbally attacking the Saudis. He argued that the US-supported Saudi state was an illegitimate and unworthy guardian of the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. He combined the language of the Islamist groups that had recently fought in Afghanistan with the rhetoric Iran had long used to attack the Saudis.[107]
 US Army soldiers from the 11th Air Defense Artillery Brigade during the Gulf War
Acting on the Carter Doctrine policy, and out of fear the Iraqi Army could launch an invasion of Saudi Arabia, US President George H. W. Bush quickly announced that the US would launch a "wholly defensive" mission to prevent Iraq from invading Saudi Arabia, under the codename Operation Desert Shield. The operation began on 7 August 1990, when US troops were sent to Saudi Arabia, due also to the request of its monarch, King Fahd, who had earlier called for US military assistance.[71] This "wholly defensive" doctrine was quickly abandoned when, on 8 August, Iraq declared Kuwait to be Iraq's 19th province and Saddam named his cousin, Ali Hassan Al-Majid, as its military-governor.[108]
 M3 Bradleys of L Troop, 3rd ACR, stand in line at a holding area during the build-up to Operation Desert Shield.
The US Navy dispatched two naval battle groups built around the aircraft carriers USS Dwight D. Eisenhower and USS Independence to the Persian Gulf, where they were ready by 8 August. The US also sent the battleships USS Missouri and USS Wisconsin to the region. A total of 48 US Air Force F-15s from the 1st Fighter Wing at Langley Air Force Base, Virginia, landed in Saudi Arabia and immediately commenced round-the-clock air patrols of the Saudi Kuwait Iraq border to discourage further Iraqi military advances. They were joined by 36 F-15 A-Ds from the 36th Tactical Fighter Wing at Bitburg, Germany. The Bitburg contingent was based at Al Kharj Air Base, approximately an hour south east of Riyadh. The 36th TFW would be responsible for 11 confirmed Iraqi Air Force aircraft shot down during the war. Two Air National Guard units were stationed at Al Kharj Air Base, the South Carolina Air National Guard's 169th Fighter Wing flew bombing missions with 24 F-16s flying 2,000 combat missions and dropping four million pounds (1,800,000 kilograms; 1,800 metric tons) of munitions, and the New York Air National Guard's 174th Fighter Wing from Syracuse flew 24 F-16s on bombing missions. Military buildup continued from there, eventually reaching 543,000 troops, twice the number used in the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Much of the material was airlifted or carried to the staging areas via fast sealift ships, allowing a quick buildup. As part of the buildup, amphibious exercises were carried out in the Gulf, including Operation Imminent Thunder, which involved the USS Midway and 15 other ships, 1,100 aircraft, and a thousand Marines.[109] In a press conference, General Schwarzkopf stated that these exercises were intended to deceive the Iraqi forces, forcing them to continue their defense of the Kuwaiti coastline.[110]
Creating a coalition
 Countries that deployed coalition forces or provided support[1] (On behalf of Afghanistan, 300 Mujaheddin joined the coalition on 11 February 1991. Niger contributed 480 troops to guard shrines in Mecca and Medina on 15 January 1991.)[1]
A series of UN Security Council resolutions and Arab League resolutions were passed regarding Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. Resolution 678, passed on 29 November 1990 gave Iraq a withdrawal deadline until 15 January 1991, and authorized "all necessary means to uphold and implement Resolution 660", and a diplomatic formulation authorizing the use of force if Iraq failed to comply.[111]
To ensure that the US received economic backing, James Baker went on an 11-day journey to nine countries in September 1990, which the press dubbed "The Tin Cup Trip". The first stop was Saudi Arabia, which a month before had already granted permission to the United States to use its facilities. However, Baker believed that Saudi Arabia should assume some of the cost of the military efforts to defend it. When Baker asked King Fahd for 15 billion dollars, the King readily agreed, with the promise that Baker ask Kuwait for the same amount.[citation needed]
The next day, 7 September, he did just that, and the Emir of Kuwait, displaced in a Sheraton hotel outside his invaded country, easily agreed. Baker then moved to enter talks with Egypt, whose leadership he considered "the moderate voice of the Middle East". President Mubarak of Egypt was furious with Saddam for his invasion of Kuwait, and for the fact that Saddam had assured Mubarak that an invasion was not his intention. Egypt received approximately $7 billion in debt forgiveness for its providing of support and troops for the US-led intervention.[112]
After stops in Helsinki and Moscow to smooth out Iraqi demands for a Middle-Eastern peace conference with the Soviet Union, Baker traveled to Syria to discuss its role in the crisis with its President Hafez Assad. Assad had a deep personal enmity towards Saddam, which was defined by the fact that "Saddam had been trying to kill him [Assad] for years." Harboring this animosity and impressed with Baker's diplomatic initiative to visit Damascus (relations had been severed since the 1983 bombing of US Marine barracks in Beirut), Assad agreed to pledge up to 100,000 Syrian troops to the coalition effort. This was a vital step in ensuring Arab states were represented in the coalition. In exchange, Washington gave Syrian dictator President Hafez al-Assad the green light to wipe out forces opposing Syria's rule in Lebanon and arranged for weapons valued at a billion dollars to be provided to Syria, mostly through Gulf states.[113] In exchange for Iran's support for the US-led intervention, the US government promised the Iranian government to end US opposition to World Bank loans to Iran. On the day before the ground invasion began, the World Bank gave Iran the first loan of $250m.[113]
Baker flew to Rome for a brief visit with the Italians in which he was promised the use of some military equipment, before journeying to Germany to meet with American ally Chancellor Kohl. Although Germany's constitution (which was brokered essentially by the United States) prohibited military involvement outside Germany's borders, Kohl committed a two billion dollar contribution to the coalition's war effort, as well as further economic and military support of coalition ally Turkey, and the transportation of Egyptian soldiers and ships to the Persian Gulf.[114]
 General Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. and President George H. W. Bush visit US troops in Saudi Arabia on Thanksgiving Day, 1990.
A coalition of forces opposing Iraq's aggression was formed, consisting of forces from 39 countries: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Italy, Kuwait, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Syria, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and the United States.[115] It was the largest coalition since World War II.[116] US Army General Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. was designated to be the commander of the coalition forces in the Persian Gulf area. The Soviet Union condemned Baghdad's aggression against Kuwait, but did not support the United States and allied intervention in Iraq and tried to avert it.[117]
Although they did not contribute any forces, Japan and Germany made financial contributions totaling $10 billion and $6.6 billion respectively. US troops represented 73% of the coalition's 956,600 troops in Iraq.[118]
Many of the coalition countries were reluctant to commit military forces. Some felt that the war was an internal Arab affair or did not want to increase US influence in the Middle East. In the end, however, many governments were persuaded by Iraq's belligerence towards other Arab states, offers of economic aid or debt forgiveness, and threats to withhold aid.[119]
Justification for intervention
 Dick Cheney meets with Prince Sultan, Minister of Defence and Aviation in Saudi Arabia to discuss how to handle the invasion of Kuwait.
The US and the UN gave several public justifications for involvement in the conflict, the most prominent being the Iraqi violation of Kuwaiti territorial integrity. In addition, the US moved to support its ally Saudi Arabia, whose importance in the region, and as a key supplier of oil, made it of considerable geopolitical importance. Shortly after the Iraqi invasion, US Defense Secretary Dick Cheney made the first of several visits to Saudi Arabia where King Fahd requested US military assistance. During a speech in a special joint session of the US Congress given on 11 September 1990, US President George H. W. Bush summed up the reasons with the following remarks: "Within three days, 120,000 Iraqi troops with 850 tanks had poured into Kuwait and moved south to threaten Saudi Arabia. It was then that I decided to act to check that aggression."[120]
The Pentagon stated that satellite photos showing a buildup of Iraqi forces along the border were this information's source, but this was later alleged to be false. A reporter for the St. Petersburg Times acquired two commercial Soviet satellite images made at the time, which showed nothing but empty desert.[121]
Other justifications for foreign involvement included Iraq's history of human rights abuses under Saddam. Iraq was also known to possess biological weapons and chemical weapons, which Saddam had used against Iranian troops during the Iran Iraq War and against his own country's Kurdish population in the Al-Anfal campaign. Iraq was also known to have a nuclear weapons program, but the report about it from January 1991 was partially declassified by the CIA on 26 May 2001.[122]
Public relations campaign targeting the public
See also: Nayirah testimony
 Gen. Colin Powell (left), Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf Jr., and Paul Wolfowitz (right) listen as Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney addresses reporters regarding the 1991 Gulf War.
Although the Iraqi military committed human rights abuses during the invasion, the alleged incidents that received the most publicity in the US were fabrications of the public relations firm hired by the government of Kuwait to persuade Americans to support military intervention. Shortly after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the organization Citizens for a Free Kuwait was formed in the US. It hired the public relations firm Hill & Knowlton for about $11 million, paid by Kuwait's government.[123]
Among many other means of influencing US opinion, such as distributing books on Iraqi atrocities to US soldiers deployed in the region, "Free Kuwait" T-shirts and speakers to college campuses, and dozens of video news releases to television stations, the firm arranged for an appearance before a group of members of the US Congress in which a young woman identifying herself as a nurse working in the Kuwait City hospital described Iraqi soldiers pulling babies out of incubators and letting them die on the floor.[124]
The story helped tip both the public and Congress towards a war with Iraq: six Congressmen said the testimony was enough for them to support military action against Iraq and seven Senators referenced the testimony in debate. The Senate supported the military actions in a 52 47 vote. However, a year after the war, this allegation was revealed to be a fabrication. The young woman who had testified was found to be a member of Kuwait's royal family and the daughter of Kuwait's ambassador to the US.[124] She hadn't lived in Kuwait during the Iraqi invasion.[citation needed]
The details of the Hill & Knowlton public relations campaign, including the incubator testimony, were published in John R. MacArthur's Second Front: Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War,[125] and came to wide public attention when an Op-ed by MacArthur was published in The New York Times. This prompted a reexamination by Amnesty International, which had originally promoted an account alleging even greater numbers of babies torn from incubators than the original fake testimony. After finding no evidence to support it, the organization issued a retraction. President Bush then repeated the incubator allegations on television.[citation needed]
In reality, the Iraqi Army did commit various well-documented crimes during its occupation of Kuwait, such as the summary execution without trial of three brothers, after which their bodies were stacked and left to decay in a public street.[126] Iraqi troops also ransacked and looted private Kuwaiti homes; one residence was repeatedly defecated in.[127] A resident later commented: "The whole thing was violence for the sake of violence, destruction for the sake of destruction ... Imagine a surrealistic painting by Salvador Dal ".[128]
US President Bush repeatedly compared Saddam Hussein to Hitler.[129]
Early battles
Air campaign
Main article: Gulf War air campaign
 The USAF F-117 Nighthawk, one of the key aircraft used in Operation Desert Storm
The Gulf War began with an extensive aerial bombing campaign on 16 January 1991. For 42 consecutive days and nights, the coalition forces subjected Iraq to one of the most intensive air bombardments in military history. The coalition flew over 100,000 sorties, dropping 88,500 tonnes of bombs,[130] which widely destroyed military and civilian infrastructure.[citation needed] The air campaign was commanded by USAF Lieutenant General Chuck Horner, who briefly served as US Central Command's Commander-in-Chief  Forward while General Schwarzkopf was still in the US.[citation needed]
A day after the deadline set in Resolution 678, the coalition launched a massive air campaign, which began the general offensive codenamed Operation Desert Storm. The priority was the destruction of Iraq's Air Force and anti-aircraft facilities. The sorties were launched mostly from Saudi Arabia and the six carrier battle groups (CVBG) in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea.[citation needed]
 Aftermath of Amiriyah shelter bombing by U.S. Air Force, which killed  at least 408 civilians in Baghdad
 An Iraqi T-54A or Type 59 tank lies destroyed after a coalition bombing attack during Operation Desert Storm.
The next targets were command and communication facilities. Saddam Hussein had closely micromanaged Iraqi forces in the Iran Iraq War, and initiative at lower levels was discouraged. Coalition planners hoped that Iraqi resistance would quickly collapse if deprived of command and control.[citation needed]
The air campaign's third and largest phase targeted military targets throughout Iraq and Kuwait: Scud missile launchers, weapons research facilities, and naval forces. About a third of the coalition's air power was devoted to attacking Scuds, some of which were on trucks and therefore difficult to locate. US and British special operations forces had been covertly inserted into western Iraq to aid in the search for and destruction of Scuds.[citation needed]
Iraqi anti-aircraft defenses, including man-portable air-defense systems, were surprisingly ineffective against enemy aircraft, and the coalition suffered only 75 aircraft losses in over 100,000 sorties, 44 due to Iraqi action. Two of these losses are the result of aircraft colliding with the ground while evading Iraqi ground-fired weapons.[131][132] One of these losses is a confirmed air-air victory.[133]
Iraqi Scud missile strikes on Israel and Saudi Arabia
Main article: Iraqi rocket attacks on Israel
Iraq's government made no secret that it would attack if invaded. Prior to the war's start, in the aftermath of the failed US Iraq peace talks in Geneva, Switzerland, a reporter asked Iraq's English-speaking Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz: "Mr. Foreign Minister, if war starts ... will you attack?" His response was: "Yes, absolutely, yes."[134][135]
Five hours after the first attacks, Iraq's state radio broadcast declared that "The dawn of victory nears as this great showdown begins." Iraq fired eight missiles the next day. These missile attacks were to continue throughout the war. Iraq fired 88 Scud missiles during the war's seven weeks.[136]
 Scud Transporter Erector Launcher (TEL) with missile in upright position
Iraq hoped to provoke a military response from Israel. The Iraqi government hoped that many Arab states would withdraw from the Coalition, as they would be reluctant to fight alongside Israel.[97] Following the first attacks, Israeli Air Force jets were deployed to patrol the northern airspace with Iraq. Israel prepared to militarily retaliate, as its policy for the previous 40 years had always been retaliation. However, President Bush pressured Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir not to retaliate and withdraw Israeli jets, fearing that if Israel attacked Iraq, the other Arab states would either desert the coalition or join Iraq. It was also feared that if Israel used Syrian or Jordanian airspace to attack Iraq, they would intervene in the war on Iraq's side or attack Israel. The coalition promised to deploy Patriot missiles to defend Israel if it refrained from responding to the Scud attacks.[137][138]
The Scud missiles targeting Israel were relatively ineffective, as firing at extreme range resulted in a dramatic reduction in accuracy and payload. Two Israeli civilians died as a direct result of the missile attacks.[139] Between 11 and 74 were killed from incorrect use of gas masks, heart attacks, and incorrect use of the anti-chemical weapons drug atropine.[139] Approximately 230 Israelis were injured.[140] Extensive property damage was also caused, and, according to the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Damage to general property consisted of 1,302 houses, 6,142 apartments, 23 public buildings, 200 shops and 50 cars."[141] It was feared that Iraq would fire missiles filled with nerve agents such as sarin. As a result, Israel's government issued gas masks to its citizens. When the first Iraqi missiles hit Israel, some people injected themselves with an antidote for nerve gas. It has been suggested that the sturdy construction techniques used in Israeli cities, coupled with the fact that Scuds were only launched at night, played an important role in limiting the number of casualties from Scud attacks.[142]
Israeli civilians taking shelter from missiles (top) and aftermath of attack in Ramat Gan, Israel (bottom)
In response to the threat of Scuds on Israel, the US rapidly sent a Patriot missile air defense artillery battalion to Israel along with two batteries of MIM-104 Patriot missiles for the protection of civilians.[143] The Royal Netherlands Air Force also deployed a Patriot missile squadron to Israel and Turkey. The Dutch Defense Ministry later stated that the military use of the Patriot missile system was largely ineffective, but its psychological value for the affected populations was high.[144]
 Aftermath of an Iraq Armed Forces strike on US barracks
Coalition air forces were also extensively exercised in "Scud hunts" in the Iraqi desert, trying to locate the camouflaged trucks before they fired their missiles at Israel or Saudi Arabia. On the ground, special operations forces also infiltrated Iraq, tasked with locating and destroying Scuds - including the ill-fated Bravo Two Zero patrol of the SAS. Once special operations were combined with air patrols, the number of attacks fell sharply, then increased slightly as Iraqi forces adjusted to coalition tactics.[citation needed]
As the Scud attacks continued, the Israelis grew increasingly impatient, and considered taking unilateral military action against Iraq. On 22 January 1991, a Scud missile hit the Israeli city of Ramat Gan, after two coalition Patriots failed to intercept it. Three elderly people suffered fatal heart attacks, another 96 people were injured, and 20 apartment buildings were damaged.[145][146] After this attack, the Israelis warned that if the US failed to stop the attacks, they would. At one point, Israeli commandos boarded helicopters prepared to fly into Iraq, but the mission was called off after a phone call from US Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, reporting on the extent of coalition efforts to destroy Scuds and emphasizing that Israeli intervention could endanger US forces.[147]
In addition to the attacks on Israel, 47 Scud missiles were fired into Saudi Arabia, and one missile was fired at Bahrain and another at Qatar. The missiles were fired at both military and civilian targets. One Saudi civilian was killed, and 78 others were injured. No casualties were reported in Bahrain or Qatar. The Saudi government issued all its citizens and expatriates with gas masks in the event of Iraq using missiles with warheads containing chemical weapons.[148] The government broadcast alerts and 'all clear' messages over television to warn citizens during Scud attacks.[citation needed]
On 25 February 1991, a Scud missile hit a US Army barracks of the 14th Quartermaster Detachment, out of Greensburg, Pennsylvania, stationed in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, killing 28 soldiers and injuring over 100.[149] A subsequent investigation found that the assigned Patriot missile battery had failed to engage due to the loss of significance effect in the onboard computer's floating point calculations compounding over 100 hours of consecutive use, shifting the range gate position far enough to lose contact with the Scud during tracking action.[150]
Iraqi invasion of Saudi Arabia (Battle of Khafji)
Main article: Battle of Khafji
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Gulf War" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (December 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Military operations during Khafji's liberation
 Marine Artillery played a huge factor in disrupting Iraqi counterattacks during the 1st Gulf War, February 1991.
On 29 January, Iraqi forces attacked and occupied the lightly defended Saudi city of Khafji with tanks and infantry. The Battle of Khafji ended two days later when the Iraqis were driven back by the Saudi Arabian National Guard, supported by Qatari forces and US Marines.[151] The allied forces used extensive artillery fire.[citation needed]
Both sides suffered casualties, although Iraqi forces sustained substantially more dead and captured than the allied forces. Eleven Americans were killed in two separate friendly fire incidents, an additional 14 US airmen were killed when their AC-130 gunship was shot down by an Iraqi surface-to-air missile,[152] and two US soldiers were captured during the battle. Saudi and Qatari forces had a total of 18 dead. Iraqi forces in Khafji had 60 300 dead and 400 captured.[citation needed]
The Battle of Khafji was an example of how air power could single-handedly hinder the advance of enemy ground forces. Upon learning of Iraqi troop movements, 140 coalition aircraft were diverted to attack an advancing column consisting of two armored divisions in battalion-sized units. Precision stand-off attacks were conducted during the night and through to the next day. Iraqi vehicle losses included 357 tanks, 147 armored personnel carriers, and 89 mobile artillery pieces. Some crews simply abandoned their vehicles upon realizing that they could be destroyed by guided bombs, stopping the divisions from massing for an organized attack on the town. One Iraqi soldier, who had fought in the Iran Iraq War, remarked that his brigade "had sustained more punishment from allied airpower in 30 minutes at Khafji than in eight years of fighting against Iran."[153]
Counter reconnaissance
Main article: Battle of Norfolk
See also: Task Force 1-41 Infantry
 Iraqi tanks destroyed by Task Force 1-41 Infantry, February 1991
Task Force 1-41 Infantry was a US Army heavy battalion task force from the 2nd Armored Division (Forward). It was the spearhead of VII Corps, consisting primarily of the 1st Battalion, 41st Infantry Regiment, 3rd Battalion, 66th Armor Regiment, and the 4th Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery Regiment. Task Force 1 41 was the first coalition force to breach the Saudi Arabian border on 15 February 1991, and to conduct ground combat operations in Iraq engaging in direct and indirect fire fights with the enemy on 17 February 1991.[154] Shortly after arrival in theatre Task Force 1 41 Infantry received a counter-reconnaissance mission.[155] 1 41 Infantry was assisted by the 1st Squadron, 4th Armored Cavalry Regiment. This joint effort would become known as Task Force Iron.[156] Counter-reconnaissance generally includes destroying or repelling the enemy's reconnaissance elements and denying their commander any observation of friendly forces. On 15 February 1991 4th Battalion of the 3rd Field Artillery Regiment fired on a trailer and a few trucks in the Iraqi sector observing American forces.[157] On 16 February 1991 several groups of Iraqi vehicles appeared to be performing reconnaissance on the Task Force and were driven away by fire from 4 3 FA.[158] Another enemy platoon, including six vehicles, was reported as being to the northeast of the Task Force. They were engaged with artillery fire from 4 3 FA.[159] Later that evening another group of Iraqi vehicles was spotted moving towards the center of the Task Force. They appeared to be Iraqi Soviet-made BTRs and tanks. For the next hour the Task Force fought several small battles with Iraqi reconnaissance units. TF 1 41 IN fired TOW missiles at the Iraqi formation destroying one tank. The rest of the formation was destroyed or driven away by artillery fire from 4 3 FA.[159] On 17 February 1991 the Task Force took enemy mortar fire, but the enemy forces managed to escape.[160] Later that evening the Task Force received enemy artillery fire but suffered no casualties.[161] That same evening the Task Force identified an Iraqi mortar position and engaged it with both direct and indirect fires.[162] The Iraqis continued probing operations against the Task Force for approximately two hours.[162] For the next two days the Task Force observed Iraqi wheeled vehicles and small units move in front of them. Several times Iraqi mortars fired on Task Force 1-41 Infantry positions.[162] On 18 February Iraqi mortar positions continued to conduct fire missions against the Task Force. The Task Force returned fire on the Iraqi positions with artillery fire from 4-3 FA and 1st Infantry Division Artillery.[163] During the Iraqi mortar attacks two American soldiers were wounded.[164] Iraqi reconnaissance elements continued to patrol the area between the Task Force and the 1st Cavalry Division.[163] VII Corps air units and artillery conducted combat operations against Iraqi defensive positions.[163]
 Soldiers of 2nd Platoon, Company C, 1st Battalion, 41st Infantry Regiment pose with a captured Iraqi tank, February 1991
Breach
Main article: Battle of Norfolk
See also: Task Force 1-41 Infantry
Task Force 1-41 Infantry was the first coalition force to breach the Saudi Arabian border on 15 February 1991 and conduct ground combat operations in Iraq engaging in direct and indirect fire fights with the enemy on 17 February 1991.[154] Prior to this action the Task Force's primary fire support battalion, 4th Battalion of the 3rd Field Artillery Regiment, participated in a massive artillery preparation. Around 300 guns from multiple countries participated in the artillery barrage. Over 14,000 rounds were fired during these missions. M270 Multiple Launch Rocket Systems contributed an additional 4,900 rockets fired at Iraqi targets.[165] Iraq lost close to 22 artillery battalions during the initial stages of this barrage,[166] including the destruction of approximately 396 Iraqi artillery pieces.[166]
 An Iraqi Republican Guard T-55 tank destroyed by Task Force 1 41 Infantry, February 1991
By the end of these raids Iraqi artillery assets had all but ceased to exist. One Iraqi unit that was totally destroyed during the preparation was the Iraqi 48th Infantry Division Artillery Group.[167] The group's commander stated his unit lost 83 of its 100 guns to the artillery preparation.[167] This artillery prep was supplemented by air attacks by B-52 bombers and Lockheed AC-130 fixed wing gunships.[168] 1st Infantry Division Apache helicopters and B-52 bombers conducted raids against Iraq's 110th Infantry Brigade.[169] The 1st Engineer Battalion and 9th Engineer Battalion marked and proofed assault lanes under direct and indirect enemy fire to secure a foothold in enemy territory and pass the 1st Infantry Division and the British 1st Armored Division forward.[154][170]
On 24 February 1991 the 1st Cavalry Division conducted a couple artillery missions against Iraqi artillery units.[171] One artillery mission struck a series of Iraqi bunkers, reinforced by Iraqi T-55 tanks, in the sector of the Iraqi 25th Infantry Division.[171] The same day the 2nd Brigade, 1st Cavalry Division with the 1st Battalion, 5th Cavalry, 1st Battalion, 32nd Armor, and the 1st Battalion, 8th Cavalry destroyed Iraqi bunkers and combat vehicles in the sector of the Iraqi 25th Infantry Division.[171] On 24 February 2nd Brigade, 1st Infantry Division rolled through the breach in the Iraqi defense west of Wadi al-Batin and also cleared the northeastern sector of the breach site of enemy resistance.[154] Task Force 3-37th Armor breached the Iraqi defense clearing four passage lanes and expanding the gap under direct enemy fire.[154] Also on 24 February the 1st Infantry Division along with the 1st Cavalry Division destroyed Iraqi outposts and patrols belonging to the Iraqi 26th Infantry Division.[172] The two divisions also began capturing prisoners.[172] The 1st Infantry Division cleared a zone between Phase Line Vermont and Phase Line Kansas.[172] Once the 1st Infantry Division's 3rd Battalion, 37th Armor reached the Iraqi rear defensive positions it destroyed an Iraqi D-30 artillery battery and many trucks and bunkers.[173]
 American AH-64 Apache helicopters proved to be very effective weapons during the 1991 Gulf War.
Task Force 1-41 Infantry was given the task of breaching Iraq's initial defensive positions along the Iraq Saudi Arabia border.[154] The 1st Squadron, 4th Armored Cavalry Regiment handled similar responsibilities in its sector of operations.[154] The 1st Infantry Division's 5th Battalion, 16th Infantry also played a significant role clearing the trenches and captured 160 Iraqi soldiers in the process.[173] Once into Iraqi territory Task Force 1-41 Infantry encountered multiple Iraqi defensive positions and bunkers. These defensive positions were occupied by a brigade-sized element.[154] Task Force 1-41 Infantry elements dismounted and prepared to engage the enemy soldiers who occupied these well-prepared and heavily fortified bunkers.[154] The Task Force found itself engaged in six hours of combat in order to clear the extensive bunker complex.[154] The Iraqis engaged the Task Force with small arms fire, RPGs, mortar fire, and what was left of Iraqi artillery assets. A series of battles unfolded resulting in heavy Iraqi casualties and the Iraqis being removed from their defensive positions with many becoming prisoners of war. Some escaped to be killed or captured by other coalition forces.[174] In the process of clearing the bunkers, Task Force 1-41 captured two brigade command posts and the command post of the Iraqi 26th Infantry Division.[175] The Task Force also captured a brigade commander, several battalion commanders, company commanders, and staff officers.[175] As combat operations progressed Task Force 1-41 Infantry engaged at short range multiple dug in enemy tanks in ambush positions.[154] For a few hours, bypassed Iraqi RPG-equipped anti-tank teams, T-55 tanks, and dismounted Iraqi infantry fired at passing American vehicles, only to be destroyed by other US tanks and fighting vehicles following the initial forces.[176]
 M109 howitzers belonging to 4th Battalion of the 3rd Field Artillery Regiment, 2nd Armored Division (FWD) conducts artillery strikes on Iraqi positions during the 1st Gulf War. 4-3 FA was the primary fire support battalion for Task Force 1-41 during the 1st Gulf War, February 1991.
The 1st Infantry Division's Task Force 2-16 Infantry cleared four lanes simultaneously through an enemy fortified trench system while inflicting heavy casualties on Iraqi forces.[154] Task Force 2-16 continued the attack clearing over 21 km (13 mi) of entrenched enemy positions resulting in the capture and destruction of numerous enemy vehicles, equipment, personnel and command bunkers.[154]
Ground campaign
See also: Battle of Al Busayyah, Battle of Phase Line Bullet, Battle of 73 Easting, Battle of Norfolk, Battle of Medina Ridge, Battle of Kuwait International Airport, and Battle of Rumaila
 A M109A2 howitzer belonging to Battery C, 4th Battalion of the 3rd Field Artillery Regiment, 2nd Armored Division (FWD) moves into position to conduct fire missions during the Battle of Norfolk, February 1991.
A 90,000 round artillery preparation fire on Iraqi defensive positions preceded the major ground assault, lasting 2.5 hours.[177] 1st Infantry Division Artillery, which included 4-3 FA battalion, was decisive during artillery combat operations performing multiple raids and fire missions. These combat operations resulted in the destruction of 50 enemy tanks, 139 APCs, 30 air defense systems, 152 artillery pieces, 27 missile launchers, 108 mortars, and 548 wheeled vehicles, 61 trench lines and bunker positions, 92 dug in and open infantry targets, and 34 logistical sites.[178] The ground campaign consisted of three or possibly four of the largest tank battles in American military history.[179][180] The battles at 73 Easting, Norfolk, and Medina Ridge are well noted for their historical significance.[179] Some consider the Battle of Medina Ridge the largest tank battle of the war.[154] Other sources consider the Battle of Norfolk the largest tank battle of the war and the second largest tank battle in American history.[38] The U.S. Marine Corps also fought the biggest tank battle in its history at Kuwait International Airport.[180] The U.S. 3rd Armored Division also fought a significant battle at Objective Dorset not far from where the Battle of Norfolk was taking place. The U.S. 3rd Armored Division destroyed approximately 300 enemy combat vehicles during this particular encounter with Iraqi forces.[154]
The U.S. VII Corps was the primary combat formation of the coalition forces.[181] It was a formidable fighting force consisting of 1,487 tanks, 1,384 infantry fighting vehicles, 568 artillery pieces, 132 MLRS, 8 missile launchers, and 242 attack helicopters.[182] It had a total troop strength of 146,321 troops.[183] Its primary full strength fighting formations were the 1st Armored Division (United States), the 3rd Armored Division (United States) and the 1st Infantry Division (United States). The 2nd Armored Division (Forward) was assigned to the 1st Infantry Division as its third maneuver brigade.[184] Its Task Force 1-41 Infantry would be the spearhead of VII Corps.[185] In addition, the corps had the 2nd Cavalry Regiment (United States) to act as a scouting and screening force, and two further heavy divisions, the 1st Cavalry Division (United States) and the United Kingdom's 1st Armoured Division, as well as the U.S. 11th Aviation Group.[154][186][187] VII Corps fought a number of large battles against Iraqi forces. Some of them historical in scope and size. Three of the battles at Norfolk, Medina Ridge, and 73 Easting are considered among the largest tank battles in history.[188] By the end of combat operations on 28 February 1991, U.S. VII Corps had driven 260 kilometres (160 mi), captured 22,000 Iraqi soldiers, and destroyed 1,350 Iraqi tanks, 1,224 armored personnel carriers, 285 artillery pieces, 105 air defense systems, and 1,229 trucks.[189]
 An OH-58D Kiowa helicopter departs from a communications site in the desert during Operation Desert Shield
The primary combat vehicles of the American divisions were the M1A1 Abrams tank and the Bradley Fighting Vehicle.[190] The primary American artillery system was the self propelled M109 howitzer.[191] The primary American attack helicopter was the Boeing AH-64 Apache (Army) with the Bell AH-1 Cobra (Army and Marines) also being in theatre.[191] The U.S. Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II ground attack aircraft would distinguish itself during the Gulf War aided by the OH-58D JAATT eyes in the sky. Together they inflicted significant damage on Iraqi ground forces.[192] U.S. A-10 "Warthog" crews would destroy 900 Iraqi tanks, 2,000 other military vehicles and 1,200 artillery pieces during combat operations.[citation needed]
The U.S. Marine Corps was represented by the 1st Marine Division and the 2nd Marine Division.[193] They were supported by the U.S. Army's 2nd Armored Division's Tiger Brigade to provide the Marines with additional armor support.[193] Marine armor units mostly consisted of the older M-60 tank.[193]  The 1st Marine Division destroyed around 60 Iraqi tanks near the Burgan oil field without suffering any losses.[194] The 1st Marine Division Task Force Ripper led the drive to the Kuwait International Airport on 27 February 1991. Marine Task Force Ripper destroyed about 100 Iraqi tanks and armored personnel carriers, including T-72 tanks.[195] The division commander Maj. Gen. J.M. Myatt said,[196] "During the first day of combat operations 1st Platoon, D Company, 3rd Tank Battalion destroyed 15 Iraqi tanks".[197] The Marines also destroyed 25 APCs and took 300 prisoners of war.[198] The U.S.M.C. would often encounter the Iraqi 3rd Armored Division in their theater of operations. Once the 1st Marine Division reached Kuwait International Airport they found what remained of the Iraqi 12th Armored Brigade, 3rd Armored Division defending it. The Marines destroyed 30 to 40 Iraqi T-72 tanks which had taken up defensive positions around the airport.[197] The Iraqi 3rd Armored Division losses included more than 250 T-55/62s and 70 T-72 tanks by the end of combat operations.[197] The Iraqi 3rd Armored Division would be totally destroyed. The 2nd Marine Division played a major role repelling the attempted Iraqi invasion of Saudi Arabia which is known as the Battle of Khafji. The 2nd Marine Division also faced heavy resistance during the Battle of Kuwait International Airport. The battle featured the "Reveille Engagement" which went on to become the largest tank battle in United States Marine Corps' entire history.[199] Marine Reserve unit Bravo Company, 4th Tank Battalion, 4th Marine division was assigned to the 2nd Marine Division.[200] Bravo Company destroyed a total of 119 enemy vehicles and took over 800 POWs by the end of combat operations.[200] The 1st Tank Battalion claimed 50 Iraqi T-55 and T-62 tanks and 25 APCs. The 3rd Battalion claimed 57 T-55s and T-62s along with 5 T-72s, 7 APCs, and 10 trucks. The 8th Battalion destroyed more than three dozen tanks and a number of other vehicles.[201] U.S. Marine Corps armor units would destroy hundreds of Iraqi tanks by the end of combat operations.[197][202] U.S. Marine Corps tank losses would be light as they suffered the loss of ten M-60 tanks during combat operations.[203]
 U. S. M1A1 Abrams tanks move out on a mission during Desert Storm in 1991. A Bradley IFV and logistics convoy can be seen in the background.
 A M109A2 howitzer belonging to Battery C, 4th Battalion of the 3rd Field Artillery Regiment, 2nd Armored Division (FWD) during the Gulf War, February 1991.
The United Kingdom was represented by its 1st Armoured Division known as the Desert Rats. The British 1st Armoured Division fielded approximately 176 Challenger 1 tanks.[204] British infantry rode into battle on the Warrior tracked armoured vehicle. It had reasonable armour protection and a 30mm gun. Modified versions of the vehicle included mortar carriers, MILAN antitank systems, and command and control vehicles; and the British possessed a variety of excellent light armoured vehicles built on their FV101 Scorpion chassis. British artillery was primarily American made M109 howitzers (155mm), M110 howitzers (203mm), and M270 MLRS which were compatible with American systems. Their air support consisted of Gazelle helicopters, used for reconnaissance, and the Lynx helicopter which was comparable to the American AH-1 Cobra. The British had their full contingent of engineer, logistics, and medical units.[205]
The British 1st Armoured Division was responsible for protecting the right flank of VII Corps. It was assumed by the Corps' planners the Iraqi 52nd Armored Division would counterattack VII Corps once their penetration into Iraqi defenses was discovered. The British 1st Armoured Division had two brigades (the 4th and 7th) which participated in Operation Granby, the name given to the British military operations during the 1991 Gulf War. The British 1st Armoured Division had traveled 217 miles in 97 hours. The British 1st Armored Division had captured or destroyed about 300 Iraqi tanks[citation needed] and a very large number of armored personnel carriers, trucks, reconnaissance vehicles, etc.[206][207] The Desert Rats also destroyed multiple Iraqi artillery positions.[208] The division also took over 7,000 Iraqi prisoners of war including two division commanders and two other general officers.[209] The British 1st Armoured Division destroyed or isolated four Iraqi infantry divisions (the 26th, 48th, 31st, and 25th) and overran the Iraqi 52nd Armored Division in several sharp engagements. The Iraqi 80th Armored Brigade would also fall victim to the British 1st Armoured Division.[210]
 British Challenger 1 tanks during the 1st Gulf War. The British Challenger tank was the most efficient tank of the Gulf war suffering no losses while destroying approximately 300 Iraqi tanks during combat operations.[211]
Iraq was represented mostly by its own VII Corps and its Jihad Corps.[192] Its most notable participants were its elite Republican Guard Divisions Tawakalna, Medina, Hammurabi, and Adnan.[212][213] The first three of these had a strength of over 660 tanks, 660 infantry fighting vehicles, and thousands of antitank weapons, self propelled artillery, and other combat systems.[192] The Tawakalna Republican Guard Division was Iraq's most powerful division which included approximately 14,000 soldiers, 220 T-72 tanks, 284 infantry fighting vehicles, 126 artillery pieces, and 18 MLRS.[214] The Iraqi 52nd Armored Division was also a primary participant.[207] It was a powerful division consisting of 245 tanks and 195 armored fighting vehicles.[215] The Iraqi 10th and 12th Armored Divisions were also present. The two divisions formed the foundation of the Jihad Corps.[192] The Iraqi 10th Armored Division was considered the best regular division in the Iraqi Army.[216] It had more modern equipment than the other regular Iraqi units.[216] It was equipped with T-72 and T-62 tanks.[216] The T-62 tank being its primary system.[216] Overall the primary tank of the Iraqi forces was the T-55 tank.[217] The Iraqis fielded them in great numbers.[217] The Iraqis also had elements of two other independent armored brigades in theatre, those being the 50th and 29th Armored Brigades.[218]
Iraq would also field multiple Infantry Divisions.[219]
 A destroyed Iraqi Army T-55 tank lies among the wreckage of many other Iraqi vehicles, such as trucks, cars and buses, somewhere along the Highway of Death in April 1991.
The Iraqis suffered the loss of over 3,000 tanks and over 2,000 other combat vehicles during these battles against the American-led coalition.[20] It is estimated that Iraqi forces suffered 20,000-50,000 troops killed during combat operations.[20] It is also estimated that over 75,000 Iraqi soldiers were wounded.[220] Between 80,000 and 175,000 Iraqi troops were taken prisoner.[20][22][23] Iraqi forces inflicted very minimal damage on Coalition forces.[221][222][223]
Kuwait's liberation
Main article: Liberation of Kuwait campaign
See also: Order of battle of the Gulf War ground campaign
 US M1A1 Abrams tanks from the 3rd Armored Division along the Line of Departure
US decoy attacks by air attacks and naval gunfire the night before Kuwait's liberation were designed to make the Iraqis believe the main coalition ground attack would focus on central Kuwait.[citation needed] For months, American units in Saudi Arabia had been under almost constant Iraqi artillery fire, as well as threats from Scud missiles and chemical attacks. On 24 February 1991, the 1st and 2nd Marine Divisions and the 1st Light Armored Infantry Battalion crossed into Kuwait and headed toward Kuwait City. They encountered trenches, barbed wire, and minefields. However, these positions were poorly defended, and were overrun in the first few hours. Several tank battles took place, but otherwise coalition troops encountered minimal resistance, as most Iraqi troops surrendered. The general pattern was that the Iraqis would put up a short fight before surrendering. However, Iraqi air defenses shot down nine US aircraft. Meanwhile, forces from Arab states advanced into Kuwait from the east, encountering little resistance and suffering few casualties.[citation needed]
 Two Iraqi T-55 tanks lie abandoned near Kuwait City on 26 February 1991.
Despite the successes of coalition forces, it was feared that the Iraqi Republican Guard would escape into Iraq before it could be destroyed. It was decided to send British armored forces into Kuwait 15 hours ahead of schedule, and to send US forces after the Republican Guard. The coalition advance was preceded by a heavy artillery and rocket barrage, after which 150,000 troops and 1,500 tanks began their advance. Iraqi forces in Kuwait counterattacked against US troops, acting on a direct order from Saddam Hussein himself. Despite the intense combat, the Americans repulsed the Iraqis and continued to advance towards Kuwait City.[224]
 The oil fires caused were a result of the scorched earth policy of Iraqi military forces retreating from Kuwait.
Kuwaiti forces were tasked with liberating the city. Iraqi troops offered only light resistance. The Kuwaitis quickly liberated the city despite losing one soldier and having one plane shot down.[citation needed] On 27 February, Saddam ordered a retreat from Kuwait,[citation needed] and President Bush declared it liberated.[225] However, an Iraqi unit at Kuwait International Airport appeared not to have received the message and fiercely resisted. US Marines had to fight for hours before securing the airport, after which Kuwait was declared secure. After four days of fighting, Iraqi forces were expelled from Kuwait.[citation needed] As part of a scorched earth policy, they set fire to nearly 700 oil wells and placed land mines around the wells to make extinguishing the fires more difficult.[226][failed verification]
Initial moves into Iraq
 Ground troop movements 24 28 February 1991 during Operation Desert Storm
The war's ground phase was officially designated Operation Desert Saber.[citation needed] The first units to move into Iraq were three patrols of the British Special Air Service's B squadron, call signs Bravo One Zero, Bravo Two Zero, and Bravo Three Zero, in late January. These eight-man patrols landed behind Iraqi lines to gather intelligence on the movements of Scud mobile missile launchers, which could not be detected from the air, as they were hidden under bridges and camouflage netting during the day.[227] Other objectives included the destruction of the launchers and their fiber-optic communications arrays that lay in pipelines and relayed coordinates to the TEL operators launching attacks against Israel. The operations were designed to prevent any possible Israeli intervention. Due to lack of sufficient ground cover to carry out their assignment, One Zero and Three Zero abandoned their operations, while Two Zero remained, and was later compromised, with only Sergeant Chris Ryan escaping to Syria.[citation needed]
 Iraqi T-62 knocked out by 3rd Armored Division fire
Elements of the 2nd Brigade, 1st Battalion 5th Cavalry of the 1st Cavalry Division of the US Army performed a direct attack into Iraq on 15 February 1991, followed by one in force on 20 February that led directly through seven Iraqi divisions which were caught off guard.[citation needed] On 17 January 1991 the 101st Airborne Division Aviation Regiment fired the first shots of the war when eight AH-64 helicopters successfully destroyed two Iraqi early warning radar sites.[228] From 15 to 20 February, the Battle of Wadi al-Batin took place inside Iraq; this was the first of two attacks by 1 Battalion 5th Cavalry of the 1st Cavalry Division. It was a feint attack, designed to make the Iraqis think that a coalition invasion would take place from the south. The Iraqis fiercely resisted, and the Americans eventually withdrew as planned back into the Wadi al-Batin. Three US soldiers were killed and nine wounded, with one M2 Bradley IFV turret destroyed, but they had taken 40 prisoners and destroyed five tanks, and successfully deceived the Iraqis. This attack led the way for the XVIII Airborne Corps to sweep around behind the 1st Cav and attack Iraqi forces to the west. On 22 February 1991, Iraq agreed to a Soviet-proposed ceasefire agreement. The agreement called for Iraq to withdraw troops to pre-invasion positions within six weeks following a total ceasefire, and called for monitoring of the ceasefire and withdrawal to be overseen by the UN Security Council.[citation needed]
 Destroyed LAV-25
The coalition rejected the proposal, but said that retreating Iraqi forces would not be attacked,[citation needed] and gave 24 hours for Iraq to withdraw its forces. On 23 February, fighting resulted in the capture of 500 Iraqi soldiers. On 24 February, British and American armored forces crossed the Iraq Kuwait border and entered Iraq in large numbers, taking hundreds of prisoners. Iraqi resistance was light, and four Americans were killed.[229]
Coalition forces enter Iraq
 Aerial view of destroyed Iraqi T-72 tank, BMP-1 and Type 63 armored personnel carriers and trucks on Highway 8 in March 1991
Shortly afterwards, the US VII Corps, in full strength and spearheaded by the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment, launched an armored attack into Iraq early on 24 February, just to the west of Kuwait, surprising Iraqi forces. Simultaneously, the US XVIII Airborne Corps launched a sweeping "left-hook" attack across southern Iraq's largely undefended desert, led by the US 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment and the 24th Infantry Division (Mechanized). This movement's left flank was protected by the French Division Daguet. The 101st Airborne Division conducted a combat air assault into enemy territory.[228] The 101st Airborne Division had struck 249 km (155 mi) behind enemy lines.[228] It was the deepest air assault operation in history.[228] Approximately 400 helicopters transported 2,000 soldiers into Iraq where they destroyed Iraqi columns trying to flee westward and prevented the escape of Iraqi forces.[230] The 101st Airborne Division travelled a further 80 to 100 km (50 to 60 mi) into Iraq.[228] By nightfall, the 101st cut off Highway 8 which was a vital supply line running between Basra and the Iraqi forces.[228] The 101st had lost 16 soldiers in action during the 100-hour war and captured thousands of enemy prisoners of war.[citation needed]
 Iraqi 'Saddam' main battle tank destroyed during Operation Desert Storm
The French force quickly overcame Iraq's 45th Infantry Division, suffering light casualties and taking a large number of prisoners, and took up blocking positions to prevent an Iraqi counterattack on the coalition's flank. The movement's right flank was protected by the United Kingdom's 1st Armoured Division. Once the allies had penetrated deep into Iraqi territory, they turned eastward, launching a flank attack against the elite Republican Guard before it could escape. The Iraqis resisted fiercely from dug-in positions and stationary vehicles, and even mounted armored charges.[citation needed]
 Remains of a downed F-16C
Unlike many previous engagements, the destruction of the first Iraqi tanks did not result in a mass surrender. The Iraqis suffered massive losses and lost dozens of tanks and vehicles, while US casualties were comparatively low, with a single Bradley knocked out. Coalition forces pressed another 10 km (6.2 mi) into Iraqi territory, and captured their objective within three hours. They took 500 prisoners and inflicted heavy losses, defeating Iraq's 26th Infantry Division. A US soldier was killed by an Iraqi land mine, another five by friendly fire, and 30 wounded during the battle. Meanwhile, British forces attacked Iraq's Medina Division and a major Republican Guard logistics base. In nearly two days of some of the war's most intense fighting, the British destroyed 40 enemy tanks and captured a division commander.[citation needed]
Meanwhile, US forces attacked the village of Al Busayyah, meeting fierce resistance. The US force destroyed military hardware and took prisoners, while suffering no casualties.[citation needed]
On 25 February 1991, Iraqi forces fired a Scud missile at an American barracks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. The missile attack killed 28 US military personnel.[231]
 A Bradley IFV burns after being hit by Iraqi T-72 fire.
The coalition's advance was much swifter than US generals had expected. On 26 February, Iraqi troops began retreating from Kuwait, after they had set 737 of its oil wells on fire. A long convoy of retreating Iraqi troops formed along the main Iraq Kuwait highway. Although they were retreating, this convoy was bombed so extensively by coalition air forces that it came to be known as the Highway of Death. Thousands of Iraqi troops were killed. American, British, and French forces continued to pursue retreating Iraqi forces over the border and back into Iraq, eventually moving to within 240 km (150 mi) of Baghdad, before withdrawing back to Iraq's border with Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.[232]
One hundred hours after the ground campaign started, on 28 February, President Bush declared a ceasefire, and he also declared that Kuwait had been liberated.[citation needed]
End of active hostilities
Main article: 1991 Iraqi uprisings
 Civilians and coalition military forces wave Kuwaiti and Saudi Arabian flags as they celebrate the retreat of Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
In coalition-occupied Iraqi territory, a peace conference was held where a ceasefire agreement was negotiated and signed by both sides. At the conference, Iraq was authorized to fly armed helicopters on their side of the temporary border, ostensibly for government transit due to the damage done to civilian infrastructure. Soon after, these helicopters and much of Iraq's military were used to fight an uprising in the south. On March 1, 1991, one day after the Gulf War ceasefire, a revolt broke out in Basra against the Iraqi government. The uprising spread within days to all of the largest Shia cities in southern Iraq: Najaf, Amarah, Diwaniya, Hilla, Karbala, Kut, Nasiriyah and Samawah. The rebellions were encouraged by an airing of "The Voice of Free Iraq" on 2 February 1991, which was broadcast from a CIA-run radio station out of Saudi Arabia. The Arabic service of the Voice of America supported the uprising by stating that the rebellion was well supported, and that they would soon be liberated from Saddam.[233]
In the North, Kurdish leaders took American statements that they would support an uprising to heart, and began fighting, hoping to trigger a coup d' tat. However, when no US support came, Iraqi generals remained loyal to Saddam and brutally crushed the Kurdish uprising and the uprising in the south.[234] Millions of Kurds fled across the mountains to Turkey and Kurdish areas of Iran. On April 5, the Iraqi government announced "the complete crushing of acts of sedition, sabotage and rioting in all towns of Iraq." An estimated 25,000 to 100,000 Iraqis were killed in the uprisings.[235][236] These events later resulted in no-fly zones being established in northern and southern Iraq.[citation needed]
In Kuwait, the Emir was restored, and suspected Iraqi collaborators were repressed. Eventually, over 400,000 people were expelled from the country, including a large number of Palestinians, because of PLO support of Saddam. Yasser Arafat didn't apologize for his support of Iraq, but after his death Mahmoud Abbas formally apologized in 2004 on behalf of the PLO. This came after the Kuwaiti government formally forgave the group.[237]
There was some criticism of the Bush administration, as they chose to allow Saddam to remain in power instead of pushing on to capture Baghdad and overthrowing his government. In their co-written 1998 book, A World Transformed, Bush and Brent Scowcroft argued that such a course would have fractured the alliance, and would have had many unnecessary political and human costs associated with it.[citation needed]
 General Norman Schwarzkopf visit Kuwaiti dignitaries in the aftermath of Operation Desert Storm.
In 1992, the US Defense Secretary during the war, Dick Cheney, made the same point:
I would guess if we had gone in there, we would still have forces in Baghdad today. We'd be running the country. We would not have been able to get everybody out and bring everybody home.
And the final point that I think needs to be made is this question of casualties. I don't think you could have done all of that without significant additional US casualties, and while everybody was tremendously impressed with the low cost of the (1991) conflict, for the 146 Americans who were killed in action and for their families, it wasn't a cheap war.
And the question in my mind is, how many additional American casualties is Saddam [Hussein] worth? And the answer is, not that damned many. So, I think we got it right, both when we decided to expel him from Kuwait, but also when the President made the decision that we'd achieved our objectives and we were not going to go get bogged down in the problems of trying to take over and govern Iraq.[238]
On 10 March 1991, 540,000 US troops began moving out of the Persian Gulf.[citation needed]
On 15 March 1991, Sheikh Jaber al-Ahmad al-Sabah returned to Kuwait, staying at the private home of a wealthy Kuwaiti as his own palace had been destroyed. He was met with a symbolic arrival with several dozens cars filled with people honking their horns and waving Kuwaiti flags who tried to follow the Emir's convoy. According to The New York Times, he faced a population divided between those who stayed and those who fled, a government straining to reassert control and a rejuvenated opposition that is pressing for greater democracy and other postwar changes, including voting rights for women. Democracy advocates had been calling for restoration of Parliament that the Emir had suspended in 1986.[239]
Coalition involvement
Main article: Coalition of the Gulf War
 Coalition troops from Egypt, Syria, Oman, France, and Kuwait during Operation Desert Storm
Coalition members included Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, France, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Italy, Kuwait, Malaysia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Syria, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America.[240]
Germany and Japan provided financial assistance[241] and donated military hardware, although they did not send direct military assistance. This later became known as checkbook diplomacy.[citation needed]
Australia
Main article: Australian contribution to the 1991 Gulf War
 HMAS Sydney in the Persian Gulf in 1991
Australia contributed a Naval Task Group, which formed part of the multi-national fleet in the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman, under Operation Damask. In addition, medical teams were deployed aboard a US hospital ship, and a naval clearance diving team took part in de-mining Kuwait's port facilities following the end of combat operations. Australian forces experienced a number of incidents in the first number of weeks of the Desert Storm Campaign including the detection of significant air threats from Iraq as a part of the outer perimeter of Battle Force Zulu; the detection of free sea floating mines and assistance to the aircraft carrier USS Midway. The Australian Task Force was also placed at great risk with regard to the sea mine threat, with HMAS Brisbane narrowly avoiding a mine. The Australians played a significant role in enforcing the sanctions put in place against Iraq following Kuwait's invasion. Following the war's end, Australia deployed a medical unit on Operation Habitat to northern Iraq as part of Operation Provide Comfort.[242]
Argentina
Main article: Operativo Alfil
 Argentine Navy Alouette III helicopter on board USNS Comfort, February 1991
Argentina was the only South American country to participate in the 1991 Gulf War. It sent a destroyer, ARA Almirante Brown (D-10), a corvette, ARA Spiro (P-43) (later replaced by another corvette, ARA Rosales (P-42)) and a supply ship, ARA Bah a San Blas (B-4) to participate on the United Nations blockade and sea control effort of the Persian Gulf. The success of "Operaci n Alfil" (English: "Operation Bishop") with more than 700 interceptions and 25,000 nautical miles (46,000 km) sailed in the theatre of operations helped to overcome the so-called "Malvinas syndrome".[243]
Argentina was later classified by the US as a major non-NATO ally due to her contributions during the war.[244]
Canada
Main article: Operation Friction
 Canadian CF-18 Hornets participated in combat during the Gulf War.
Canada was one of the first countries to condemn Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, and it quickly agreed to join the US-led coalition. In August 1990, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney committed the Canadian Forces to deploy a Naval Task Group. The destroyers HMCS Terra Nova and HMCS Athabaskan joined the maritime interdiction force supported by the supply ship HMCS Protecteur in Operation Friction. The Canadian Task Group led the coalition's maritime logistics forces in the Persian Gulf. A fourth ship, HMCS Huron, arrived in-theater after hostilities had ceased and was the first allied ship to visit Kuwait.[citation needed]
Following the UN-authorized use of force against Iraq, the Canadian Forces deployed a CF-18 Hornet and CH-124 Sea King squadron with support personnel, as well as a field hospital to deal with casualties from the ground war. When the air war began, the CF-18s were integrated into the coalition force and were tasked with providing air cover and attacking ground targets. This was the first time since the Korean War that Canada's military had participated in offensive combat operations. The only CF-18 Hornet to record an official victory during the conflict was an aircraft involved in the beginning of the Battle of Bubiyan against the Iraqi Navy.[245]
France
Main article: Op ration Daguet
 French and American soldiers inspecting an Iraqi Type 69 tank destroyed by the French Division Daguet during Operation Desert Storm
The second largest European contingent was from France, which committed 18,000 troops.[240] Operating on the left flank of the US XVIII Airborne Corps, the French Army force was the Division Daguet, including troops from the French Foreign Legion. Initially, the French operated independently under national command and control, but coordinated closely with the Americans (via CENTCOM) and Saudis. In January, the Division was placed under the tactical control of the XVIII Airborne Corps. France also deployed several combat aircraft and naval units. The French called their contribution Op ration Daguet.[citation needed]
Italy
Main article: Operazione Locusta
 One of the Italian tornadoes used in the operation
Following the invasion and annexation of Kuwait by Iraq, on September 25, 1990, the Italian Government sent eight multirole fighter bombers Tornado IDS (plus two spare) in the Persian Gulf, belonging to the 6 , 36  and 50  Stormo, which were deployed at the Al Dhafra Air Base, near Abu Dhabi, in United Arab Emirates.[246][247][248] During the 42 days of war, Italian fighters made 226 sorties for a total of 589 flight hours. The Italian Air Force recorded the loss of a single aircraft in the gulf war. The use of Italian aircraft as part of the Desert Storm operation represented the first operational employment in combat missions of Italian Air Force aircraft since the end of World War II.[citation needed]
United Kingdom
Main article: Operation Granby
 British Army Challenger 1 main battle tank during Operation Desert Storm
The United Kingdom committed the largest contingent of any European state that participated in the war's combat operations. Operation Granby was the code name for the operations in the Persian Gulf. British Army regiments (mainly with the 1st Armoured Division), Royal Air Force, Naval Air Squadrons and Royal Navy vessels were mobilized in the Persian Gulf. Both Royal Air Force and Naval Air Squadrons, using various aircraft, operated from airbases in Saudi Arabia and Naval Air Squadrons from various vessels in the Persian Gulf. The United Kingdom played a major role in the Battle of Norfolk where its forces destroyed over 200 Iraqi tanks and a large quantity of other vehicles.[206][207] After 48 hours of combat the British 1st Armoured Division destroyed or isolated four Iraqi infantry divisions (the 26th, 48th, 31st, and 25th) and overran the Iraqi 52nd Armored Division in several sharp engagements.[207]
Chief Royal Navy vessels deployed to the Persian Gulf included Broadsword-class frigates, and Sheffield-class destroyers; other R.N. and RFA ships were also deployed. The light aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal was deployed to the Mediterranean Sea.[citation needed]
Several SAS squadrons were deployed.[citation needed]
A British Challenger 1 achieved the longest range confirmed tank kill of the war, destroying an Iraqi tank with an armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding-sabot (APFSDS) round fired over 4,700 metres (2.9 mi) the longest tank-on-tank kill shot recorded.[249][250]
Casualties
Civilian
 Iraqi Kurds fleeing to Turkey shortly after the war
Over 1,000 Kuwaiti civilians were killed by Iraqis.[251] More than 600 Kuwaitis went missing during Iraq's occupation,[252] and approximately 375 remains were found in mass graves in Iraq. The increased importance of air attacks from both coalition warplanes and cruise missiles led to controversy over the number of civilian deaths caused during Desert Storm's initial stages. Within Desert Storm's first 24 hours, more than 1,000 sorties were flown, many against targets in Baghdad. The city was the target of heavy bombing, as it was the seat of power for Saddam and the Iraqi forces' command and control. This ultimately led to civilian casualties.[citation needed]
In one noted incident, two USAF stealth planes bombed a bunker in Amiriyah, causing the deaths of 408 Iraqi civilians in the shelter.[253] Scenes of burned and mutilated bodies were subsequently broadcast, and controversy arose over the bunker's status, with some stating that it was a civilian shelter, while others contended that it was a center of Iraqi military operations, and that the civilians had been deliberately moved there to act as human shields.[citation needed]
Saddam's government gave high civilian casualty to draw support from Islamic countries. The Iraqi government claimed that 2,300 civilians died during the air campaign.[254] According to the Project on Defense Alternatives study, 3,664 Iraqi civilians were killed in the conflict.[255]
During the nationwide uprisings against the Ba'athist Iraqi government that directly followed the end of the Gulf War in March and April, an estimated 25,000 to 100,000 Iraqis were killed, overwhelmingly civilians.[235]
A Harvard University study released in June 1991 predicted that there would be tens of thousands of additional Iraqi civilian deaths by the end of 1991 due to the "public health catastrophe" caused by the destruction of the country's electrical generating capacity. "Without electricity, hospitals cannot function, perishable medicines spoil, water cannot be purified and raw sewage cannot be processed,". The US government refused to release its own study of the effects of the Iraqi public health crisis.[256]
An investigation by Beth Osborne Daponte estimated total civilian fatalities at about 3,500 from bombing, and some 100,000 from the war's other effects.[257][258][259] In 2002, Daponte estimated the total number of Iraqi deaths caused directly and indirectly by the Gulf War to be between 142,500 and 206,000, including 100,000 120,000 military deaths, 20,000 35,000 civilian deaths in civil war and 15,000 30,000 refugee deaths.[260]
Iraq also launched numerous attacks on civilian targets in Israel and Saudi Arabia. A 1991 report by Middle East Watch said that at least one Saudi civilian was killed after they were hit by Iraqi shelling in Riyadh.[261] Disputed amounts of people were also killed during the Iraqi rocket attacks on Israel.[citation needed]
Iraqi
A United Nations report in March 1991 described the effect on Iraq of the US-led bombing campaign as "near apocalyptic," bringing back Iraq to the "pre-industrial age."[262] The exact number of Iraqi combat casualties is unknown, but is believed to have been heavy. Some estimate that Iraq sustained between 20,000 and 35,000 fatalities.[257] A report commissioned by the US Air Force estimated 10,000 12,000 Iraqi combat deaths in the air campaign, and as many as 10,000 casualties in the ground war.[263] This analysis is based on Iraqi prisoner of war reports.[citation needed]
According to the Project on Defense Alternatives study, between 20,000 and 26,000 Iraqi military personnel were killed in the conflict while 75,000 others were wounded.[255]
According to Kanan Makiya, "For the Iraqi people, the cost of enforcing the will of the United Nations has been grotesque."[264] General Schwarzkopf talked about "a very, very large number of dead in these units, a very, very large number indeed."[265] The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, Les Aspin, estimated that "at least 65,000 Iraqi soldiers were killed".[265] A figure was supported by Israeli sources who speak of "one to two hundred thousand Iraqi casualties." Most of the killing "took place during the ground war. Fleeing soldiers were bombed with a device known as a 'fuel-air explosive.'"[265]
Coalition
Coalition troops killed by country
Country
Total
Enemyaction
Accident
Friendlyfire
Ref
 United States
146
111
35
35
[266]
 Senegal
92
92
[267]
 United Kingdom
47
38
1
9
[268]
 Saudi Arabia
24
18
6
[269][270]
 Egypt
11
5
[270][271]
 France
9
2
[266]
 United Arab Emirates
6
6
[272]
 Qatar
3
3
[266]
 Syria
2
[273]
 Spain
2
2
[274]
 Kuwait
1
1
[275]
 Italy
1
1
[276]
 Czechoslovakia
1
[277][278]
 Sailors from a US Navy honor guard carry Navy pilot Scott Speicher's remains.
The US Department of Defense reports that US forces suffered 148 battle-related deaths (35 to friendly fire[279]), with one pilot listed as MIA (his remains were found and identified in August 2009). A further 145 Americans died in non-combat accidents.[266] The UK suffered 47 deaths (nine to friendly fire, all by US forces), France nine,[266] and the other countries, not including Kuwait, suffered 37 deaths (18 Saudis, one Egyptian, six UAE and three Qataris).[266] At least 605 Kuwaiti soldiers were still missing 10 years after their capture.[280]
The largest single loss of life among coalition forces happened on 25 February 1991, when an Iraqi Al Hussein missile hit a US military barrack in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, killing 28 US Army Reservists from Pennsylvania. In all, 190 coalition troops were killed by Iraqi fire during the war, 113 of whom were American, out of 358 coalition deaths. Another 44 soldiers were killed and 57 wounded by friendly fire. 145 soldiers died of exploding munitions or non-combat accidents.[281]
The largest accident among coalition forces happened on 21 March 1991, when a Royal Saudi Air Force C-130H crashed in heavy smoke on approach to Ras Al-Mishab Airport, Saudi Arabia. 92 Senegalese soldiers and six Saudi crew members were killed.[270]
The number of coalition wounded in combat was 776, including 458 Americans.[282]
190 coalition troops were killed by Iraqi combatants, the rest of the 379 coalition deaths were from friendly fire or accidents. This number was much lower than expected. Among the American combat dead were four female soldiers.[283]
Friendly fire
While the death toll among coalition forces engaging Iraqi combatants was very low, a substantial number of deaths were caused by accidental attacks from other Allied units. Of the 148 US troops who died in battle, 24% were killed by friendly fire, a total of 35 service personnel.[284] A further 11 died in detonations of coalition munitions. Nine British military personnel were killed in a friendly fire incident when a USAF A-10 Thunderbolt II destroyed a group of two Warrior IFVs.[citation needed]
Aftermath and controversies
Main article: Aftermath of the Gulf War
Gulf War illness
Main article: Gulf War syndrome
Many returning coalition soldiers reported illnesses following their action in the war, a phenomenon known as Gulf War syndrome (GWS) or Gulf War illness (GWI). Common symptoms reported are chronic fatigue, fibromyalgia, and gastrointestinal disorder.[285] There has been widespread speculation and disagreement about the causes of the illness and the possibly related birth defects. Researchers found that infants born to male veterans of the 1991 war had higher rates of two types of heart valve defects. Some children born after the war to Gulf War veterans had a certain kidney defect that was not found in Gulf War veterans' children born before the war. Researchers have said that they did not have enough information to link birth defects with exposure to toxic substances.[286]
In 1994, the US Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs with Respect to Export Administration published a report entitled, "U.S. Chemical and Biological Warfare-Related Dual Use Exports to Iraq and their Possible Impact on the Health Consequences of the Gulf War". This publication, called the Riegle Report, summarized testimony this committee had received establishing that the U.S. had in the 1980s supplied Saddam Hussein with chemical and biological warfare technology, that Saddam had used such chemical weapons against Iran and his own native Kurds, and possibly against U.S. soldiers as well, plausibly contributing to the GWS.[citation needed]
A 2022 study by Dr. Robert W. Haley of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, et al., of 1,016 U.S. Gulf War veterans found evidence of a causal link between GWS and exposure to low levels of the nerve agent sarin, which was released into the air by coalition bombing of Iraqi chemical weapons facilities. Significantly, the study found an increased incidence of GWS not only among veterans who recounted hearing nerve agent alarms, but also among veterans with the RR or QR (as opposed to the QQ) forms of the PON1 gene, which produces an enzyme that deactivates organophosphates (including sarin) through hydrolysis. By contrast, GWS was inversely associated with higher levels of the type Q isozyme, which is more efficient at breaking down sarin than its type R counterpart. The authors "found that the PON1 genotype and hearing nerve agent alarms were independent and the findings robust to both measured and unmeasured confounding, supporting a mechanistic [gene environment] interaction. ... Moreover, the change in the combined effect from one category to the next was significantly greater than the sum of the independent effects of the environmental exposure and the genotype".[287]
Effects of depleted uranium
Main article: Depleted uranium  Health considerations
 Approximate area and major clashes in which DU rounds were used
The US military used depleted uranium in tank kinetic energy penetrators and 20 30 mm (0.79 1.18 in) cannon ordnance. Significant controversy regarding the long term safety of depleted uranium exists, including claims of pyrophoric, genotoxic, and teratogenic heavy metal effects. Many have cited its use during the war as a contributing factor to a number of major health issues in veterans and in surrounding civilian populations, including in birth defects and child cancer rates. Scientific opinion on the risk is mixed.[288][289][290] In 2004, Iraq had the highest mortality rate due to leukemia of any country.[291][292][293][294]
Depleted uranium has 40% less radioactivity than natural uranium, but the negative effects should not be overlooked.[295] Some say that depleted uranium is not a significant health hazard unless it is taken into the body. External exposure to radiation from depleted uranium is generally not a major concern because the alpha particles emitted by its isotopes travel only a few centimeters in air or can be stopped by a sheet of paper. Also, the uranium-235 that remains in depleted uranium emits only a small amount of low-energy gamma radiation. However, if allowed to enter the body, depleted uranium, like natural uranium, has the potential for both chemical and radiological toxicity with the two important target organs being the kidneys and the lungs.[296]
Highway of Death
Main article: Highway of Death
 Destroyed Iraqi civilian and military vehicles on the Highway of Death
On the night of 26 27 February 1991, some Iraqi forces began leaving Kuwait on the main highway north of Al Jahra in a column of some 1,400 vehicles. A patrolling E-8 Joint STARS aircraft observed the retreating forces and relayed the information to the DDM-8 air operations center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.[citation needed] These vehicles and the retreating soldiers were subsequently attacked by two A-10 aircraft, resulting in a 60 kilometres (37 mi) stretch of highway strewn with debris the Highway of Death. New York Times reporter Maureen Dowd wrote, "With the Iraqi leader facing military defeat, Mr. Bush decided that he would rather gamble on a violent and potentially unpopular ground war than risk the alternative: an imperfect settlement hammered out by the Soviets and Iraqis that world opinion might accept as tolerable."[297]
Chuck Horner, Commander of US and allied air operations, has written:
[By February 26], the Iraqis totally lost heart and started to evacuate occupied Kuwait, but airpower halted the caravan of Iraqi Army and plunderers fleeing toward Basra. This event was later called by the media "The Highway of Death." There were certainly a lot of dead vehicles, but not so many dead Iraqis. They'd already learned to scamper off into the desert when our aircraft started to attack. Nevertheless, some people back home wrongly chose to believe we were cruelly and unusually punishing our already whipped foes.
...
By February 27, talk had turned toward terminating the hostilities. Kuwait was free. We were not interested in governing Iraq. So the question became "How do we stop the killing."[298]
 Bulldozer assault
 An armored bulldozer similar to the ones used in the attack
Another incident during the war highlighted the question of large-scale Iraqi combat deaths. This was the "bulldozer assault", wherein two brigades from the US 1st Infantry Division (Mechanized) were faced with a large and complex trench network, as part of the heavily fortified "Saddam Hussein Line". After some deliberation, they opted to use anti-mine plows mounted on tanks and combat earthmovers to simply plow over and bury alive the defending Iraqi soldiers. Not a single American was killed during the attack. Reporters were banned from witnessing the attack, near the neutral zone that touches the border between Saudi Arabia and Iraq.[299] Every American in the assault was inside an armored vehicle.[299]
Patrick Day Sloyan of Newsday reported, "Bradley Fighting Vehicles and Vulcan armored carriers straddled the trench lines and fired into the Iraqi soldiers as the tanks covered them with mounds of sand. 'I came through right after the lead company,' [Col. Anthony] Moreno said. 'What you saw was a bunch of buried trenches with peoples' arms and things sticking out of them.'"[300] However, after the war, the Iraqi government said that only 44 bodies were found.[301] In his book The Wars Against Saddam, John Simpson alleges that US forces attempted to cover up the incident.[302] After the incident, the commander of the 1st Brigade said: "I know burying people like that sounds pretty nasty, but it would be even nastier if we had to put our troops in the trenches and clean them out with bayonets."[300] Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney did not mention the First Division's tactics in an interim report to Congress on Operation Desert Storm.[299] In the report, Cheney acknowledged that 457 enemy soldiers were buried during the ground war.[299]
Palestinian exodus from Kuwait
Main article: Palestinian exodus from Kuwait (1990 91)
A Palestinian exodus from Kuwait took place during and after the Gulf War. During the Gulf War, more than 200,000 Palestinians fled Kuwait during the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait due to harassment and intimidation by Iraqi security forces,[303] in addition to getting fired from work by Iraqi authority figures in Kuwait.[303] After the Gulf War, the Kuwaiti authorities forcibly pressured nearly 200,000 Palestinians to leave Kuwait in 1991.[303] Kuwait's policy, which led to this exodus, was a response to alignment of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and the PLO with Saddam Hussein.
The Palestinians who fled Kuwait were Jordanian citizens.[304] In 2013, 280,000 Jordanian citizens of Palestinian origin lived in Kuwait.[305] In 2012, 80,000 Palestinians (without Jordanian citizenship) lived in Kuwait.[306]
Saudi Arabia expelled Yemeni workers after Yemen supported Saddam during the Gulf War.[307]
Coalition bombing of Iraq's civilian infrastructure
In the 23 June 1991 edition of The Washington Post, reporter Bart Gellman wrote: 
Many of the targets were chosen only secondarily to contribute to the military defeat of Iraq ... Military planners hoped the bombing would amplify the economic and psychological impact of international sanctions on Iraqi society ... They deliberately did great harm to Iraq's ability to support itself as an industrial society ...[308]
In the Jan/Feb 1995 edition of Foreign Affairs, French diplomat Eric Rouleau wrote: 
[T]he Iraqi people, who were not consulted about the invasion, have paid the price for their government's madness ... Iraqis understood the legitimacy of a military action to drive their army from Kuwait, but they have had difficulty comprehending the Allied rationale for using air power to systematically destroy or cripple Iraqi infrastructure and industry: electric power stations (92 percent of installed capacity destroyed), refineries (80 percent of production capacity), petrochemical complexes, telecommunications centers (including 135 telephone networks), bridges (more than 100), roads, highways, railroads, hundreds of locomotives and boxcars full of goods, radio and television broadcasting stations, cement plants, and factories producing aluminum, textiles, electric cables, and medical supplies.[309]
However, the UN subsequently spent billions rebuilding hospitals, schools, and water purification facilities throughout the country.[310]
Abuse of Coalition POWs
During the conflict, coalition aircrew shot down over Iraq were displayed as prisoners of war on TV, most with visible signs of abuse. Amongst several testimonies to poor treatment,[311] USAF Captain Richard Storr was allegedly tortured by Iraqis during the Persian Gulf War. Iraqi secret police broke his nose, dislocated his shoulder and punctured his eardrum.[312] Royal Air Force Tornado crew John Nichol and John Peters have both alleged that they were tortured during this time.[313][314] Nichol and Peters were forced to make statements against the war on television. Members of British Special Air Service Bravo Two Zero were captured while providing information about an Iraqi supply line of Scud missiles to coalition forces. Only one, Chris Ryan, evaded capture while the group's other surviving members were violently tortured.[315] Flight surgeon (later General) Rhonda Cornum was sexually assaulted by one of her captors[316] after the Black Hawk helicopter in which she was riding was shot down while searching for a downed F-16 pilot.[citation needed]
Operation Southern Watch
Main article: Operation Southern Watch
Since the war, the US has had a continued presence of 5,000 troops stationed in Saudi Arabia  a figure that rose to 10,000 during the 2003 conflict in Iraq.[317] Operation Southern Watch enforced the no-fly zones over southern Iraq set up after 1991; oil exports through the Persian Gulf's shipping lanes were protected by the Bahrain-based US Fifth Fleet.[citation needed]
Since Saudi Arabia houses Mecca and Medina, Islam's holiest sites, many Muslims were upset at the permanent military presence. The continued presence of US troops in Saudi Arabia after the war was one of the stated motivations behind the 11 September terrorist attacks,[317] the Khobar Towers bombing, and the date chosen for the 1998 US embassy bombings (7 August), which was eight years to the day that US troops were sent to Saudi Arabia.[318] Osama bin Laden interpreted the Islamic prophet Muhammad as banning the "permanent presence of infidels in Arabia".[319] In 1996, bin Laden issued a fatwa, calling for US troops to leave Saudi Arabia. In a December 1999 interview with Rahimullah Yusufzai, bin Laden said he felt that Americans were "too near to Mecca" and considered this a provocation to the entire Islamic world.[320]
Sanctions
Main articles: United Nations Security Council Resolution 661 and Sanctions against Iraq
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
United Nations Security Council Resolution 661
On 6 August 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 661 which imposed economic sanctions on Iraq, providing for a full trade embargo, excluding medical supplies, food and other items of humanitarian necessity, these to be determined by the council's sanctions committee. From 1991 until 2003, the effects of government policy and sanctions regime led to hyperinflation, widespread poverty and malnutrition.[citation needed]
During the late 1990s, the UN considered relaxing the sanctions imposed because of the hardships suffered by ordinary Iraqis. Studies dispute the number of people who died in south and central Iraq during the years of the sanctions.[321][322][323]
Draining of the Qurna Marshes
Main article: Draining of the Mesopotamian Marshes
The draining of the Qurna Marshes was an irrigation project in Iraq during and immediately after the war, to drain a large area of marshes in the Tigris Euphrates river system. Formerly covering an area of around 3,000 km2 (1,200 sq mi), the large complex of wetlands were nearly emptied of water, and the local Shi'ite population relocated, following the war and 1991 uprisings. By 2000, the United Nations Environment Programme estimated that 90% of the marshlands had disappeared, causing desertification of over 7,500 square miles (19,000 km2).[citation needed]
The draining of the Qurna Marshes also called The Draining of the Mesopotamian Marshes occurred in Iraq and to a smaller degree in Iran between the 1950s and 1990s to clear large areas of the marshes in the Tigris-Euphrates river system. Formerly covering an area of around 20,000 km2 (7,700 sq mi), the large complex of wetlands was 90% drained before the 2003 Invasion of Iraq. The marshes are typically divided into three main sub-marshes, the Hawizeh, Central, and Hammar Marshes and all three were drained at different times for different reasons. Initial draining of the Central Marshes was intended to reclaim land for agriculture but later all three marshes would become a tool of war and revenge.[324]
Many international organizations such as the UN Human Rights Commission, the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, the Wetlands International, and Middle East Watch have described the project as a political attempt to force the Marsh Arabs out of the area through water diversion tactics.[324]
Oil spill
Main article: Gulf War oil spill
On 23 January, Iraq dumped 400 million US gallons (1,500,000 m3) of crude oil into the Persian Gulf,[326] causing the largest offshore oil spill in history at that time.[325] It was reported as a deliberate natural resources attack to keep US Marines from coming ashore (Missouri and Wisconsin had shelled Failaka Island during the war to reinforce the idea that there would be an amphibious assault attempt).[327] About 30 40% of this came from allied raids on Iraqi coastal targets.[328]
Kuwaiti oil fires
Main article: Kuwaiti oil fires
See also: Environmental impact of war
 Oil well fires rage outside Kuwait City in 1991.
The Kuwaiti oil fires were caused by the Iraqi military setting fire to 700 oil wells as part of a scorched earth policy while retreating from Kuwait in 1991 after conquering the country but being driven out by coalition forces. The fires started in January and February 1991, and the last one was extinguished by November.[329]
The resulting fires burned uncontrollably because of the dangers of sending in firefighting crews. Land mines had been placed in areas around the oil wells, and a military cleaning of the areas was necessary before the fires could be put out. Somewhere around 6 million barrels (950,000 m3) of oil were lost each day. Eventually, privately contracted crews extinguished the fires, at a total cost of US$1.5 billion to Kuwait.[330] By that time, however, the fires had burned for approximately 10 months, causing widespread pollution.[citation needed]
Cost
 A sentry patrols along a line-up of OH-58 Kiowa helicopters
The cost of the war to the United States was calculated by the US Congress in April 1992 to be $61.1 billion[331] (equivalent to $107 billion in 2021).[332] About $52 billion of that amount was paid by other countries: $36 billion by Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and other Arab states of the Persian Gulf; $16 billion by Germany and Japan (which sent no combat forces due to their constitutions). About 25% of Saudi Arabia's contribution was paid with in-kind services to the troops, such as food and transportation.[331] US troops represented about 74% of the combined force, and the global cost was therefore higher.[citation needed]
Effect on developing countries
Apart from the impact on Arab States of the Persian Gulf, the resulting economic disruptions after the crisis affected many states. The Overseas Development Institute (ODI) undertook a study in 1991 to assess the effects on developing states and the international community's response. A briefing paper finalized on the day that the conflict ended draws on their findings which had two main conclusions: Many developing states were severely affected and while there has been a considerable response to the crisis, the distribution of assistance was highly selective.[333]
The ODI factored in elements of "cost" which included oil imports, remittance flows, re-settlement costs, loss of export earnings and tourism. For Egypt, the cost totaled $1 billion, 3% of GDP. Yemen had a cost of $830 million, 10% of GDP, while it cost Jordan $1.8 billion, 32% of GDP.[citation needed]
International response to the crisis on developing states came with the channeling of aid through The Gulf Crisis Financial Co-ordination Group. They were 24 states, comprising most of the OECD countries plus some Gulf states: Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Kuwait. The members of this group agreed to disperse $14 billion in development assistance.[citation needed]
The World Bank responded by speeding up the disbursement of existing project and adjustment loans. The International Monetary Fund adopted two lending facilities  the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) and the Compensatory & Contingency Financing Facility (CCFF). The European Community offered $2 billion[clarification needed] in assistance.[333]
Media coverage
Main article: Media coverage of the Gulf War
The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (January 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The war was heavily televised. For the first time, people all over the world watched live pictures of missiles hitting their targets and fighters departing from aircraft carriers. Allied forces were keen to demonstrate their weapons' accuracy.[citation needed]
In the United States, the "big three" network anchors led the war's network news coverage: ABC's Peter Jennings, CBS's Dan Rather, and NBC's Tom Brokaw were anchoring their evening newscasts when air strikes began on 16 January 1991. ABC News correspondent Gary Shepard, reporting live from Baghdad, told Jennings of the city's quietness. But, moments later, Shepard returned as flashes of light were seen on the horizon and tracer fire was heard on the ground.[citation needed]
On CBS, viewers were watching a report from correspondent Allen Pizzey, reporting from Baghdad, when the war began. Rather, after the report was finished, announced unconfirmed reports of flashes in Baghdad and heavy air traffic at bases in Saudi Arabia. On the NBC Nightly News, correspondent Mike Boettcher reported unusual air activity in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. Moments later, Brokaw announced to his viewers that the air attack had begun.[citation needed]
It was CNN whose coverage gained the most popularity and its wartime coverage is often cited as one of the landmark events in the network's history, ultimately leading to the establishment of CNN International. CNN correspondents John Holliman and Peter Arnett and CNN anchor Bernard Shaw relayed audio reports from Baghdad's Al-Rashid Hotel as the air strikes began. The network had previously convinced the Iraqi government to allow installation of a permanent audio circuit in their makeshift bureau. When the telephones of all the other Western TV correspondents went dead during the bombing, CNN was the only service able to provide live reporting. After the initial bombing, Arnett remained behind and was, for a time, the only American TV correspondent reporting from Iraq.[citation needed]
In the United Kingdom, the BBC devoted the FM broadcast portion of its national talk radio station BBC Radio 4 to an 18-hour rolling news format called Radio 4 News FM. The station was short-lived, ending shortly after President Bush declared the ceasefire and Kuwait's liberation. However, it paved the way for the later introduction of Radio Five Live.[citation needed]
Two BBC journalists, John Simpson and Bob Simpson (no relation), defied their editors and remained in Baghdad to report on the war's progress. They were responsible for a report which included an "infamous cruise missile that travelled down a street and turned left at a traffic light."[334]
Newspapers all over the world also covered the war and Time magazine published a special issue dated 28 January 1991, the headline "War in the Gulf" emblazoned on the cover over a picture of Baghdad taken as the war began.[citation needed]
US policy regarding media freedom was much more restrictive than in the Vietnam War. The policy had been spelled out in a Pentagon document entitled Annex Foxtrot. Most of the press information came from briefings organized by the military. Only selected journalists were allowed to visit the front lines or conduct interviews with soldiers. Those visits were always conducted in the presence of officers, and were subject to both prior approval by the military and censorship afterward. This was ostensibly to protect sensitive information from being revealed to Iraq. This policy was heavily influenced by the military's experience with the Vietnam War, in which public opposition within the US grew throughout the war's course. It was not only the limitation of information in the Middle East; media were also restricting what was shown about the war with more graphic depictions like Ken Jarecke's image of a burnt Iraqi soldier being pulled from the American AP wire whereas in Europe it was given extensive coverage.[335][336][337]
The war's coverage was new in its immediacy. About halfway through the war, Iraq's government decided to allow live satellite transmissions from the country by Western news organizations, and US journalists returned en masse to Baghdad. NBC's Tom Aspell, ABC's Bill Blakemore, and CBS News' Betsy Aaron filed reports, subject to acknowledged Iraqi censorship. Throughout the war, footage of incoming missiles was broadcast almost immediately.[citation needed]
A British crew from CBS News, David Green and Andy Thompson, equipped with satellite transmission equipment, traveled with the front line forces and, having transmitted live TV pictures of the fighting en route, arrived the day before the forces in Kuwait City, broadcasting live television from the city and covering the entrance of the Arab forces the next day.[citation needed]
Alternative media outlets provided views opposing the war. Deep Dish Television compiled segments from independent producers in the US and abroad, and produced a 10-hour series that was distributed internationally, called The Gulf Crisis TV Project.[338] The series' first program War, Oil and Power[339] was compiled and released in 1990, before the war broke out. News World Order[340] was the title of another program in the series; it focused on the media's complicity in promoting the war, as well as Americans' reactions to the media coverage. In San Francisco, Paper Tiger Television West produced a weekly cable television show with highlights of mass demonstrations, artists' actions, lectures, and protests against mainstream media coverage at newspaper offices and television stations. Local media outlets in cities across the US screened similar oppositional media.[citation needed]
Media watchdog group Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR) critically analyzed media coverage during the war in various articles and books, such as the 1991 Gulf War Coverage: The Worst Censorship was at Home.[341]
Terminology
The following names have been used to describe the conflict itself:
Gulf War and Persian Gulf War are the most common terms for the conflict used within western countries, though it may also be called the First Gulf War (to distinguish it from the 2003 invasion of Iraq and the subsequent Iraq War). Some authors have called it the Second Gulf War to distinguish it from the Iran Iraq War.[342] Liberation of Kuwait (Arabic:    ) (ta r r al-kuwayt) is the term used by Kuwait and most of the coalition's Arab states, including Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Egypt, and the United Arab Emirates. Terms in other languages include French: la Guerre du Golfe and German: Golfkrieg (Gulf War); German: Zweiter Golfkrieg (Second Gulf War); French: Guerre du Kowe t (War of Kuwait).[citation needed]
Operational names
Most of the coalition states used various names for their operations and the war's operational phases. These are sometimes incorrectly used as the conflict's overall name, especially the US Desert Storm:
Operation Desert Shield was the US operational name for the US buildup of forces and Saudi Arabia's defense from 2 August 1990, to 16 January 1991[citation needed]
Operation Desert Storm was the US name of the airland conflict from 17 January 1991, through 28 February 1991[citation needed]
Operation Desert Sabre (early name Operation Desert Sword) was the US name for the airland offensive against the Iraqi Army in the Kuwaiti Theater of Operations (the "100-hour war") from 24 to 28 February 1991, in itself, part of Operation Desert Storm[citation needed]
Operation Desert Farewell was the name given to the return of US units and equipment to the US in 1991 after Kuwait's liberation, sometimes referred to as Operation Desert Calm[citation needed]
Operativo Alfil was the Argentine name for Argentine military activities[citation needed]
Op ration Daguet was the French name for French military activities in the conflict[citation needed]
Operation Friction was the name of the Canadian operations[citation needed]
Operation Granby was the British name for British military activities during the operations and conflict[citation needed]
Operazione Locusta (Italian for Locust) was the Italian name for the operations and conflict[citation needed]
Campaign names
The US divided the conflict into three major campaigns:
Defense of Saudi Arabian country for the period 2 August 1990, through 16 January 1991[citation needed]
Liberation and Defense of Kuwait for the period 17 January 1991, through 11 April 1991[citation needed]
Southwest Asia Cease-Fire for the period 12 April 1991, through 30 November 1995, including Operation Provide Comfort[citation needed]
Technology
Further information: List of Gulf War military equipment
 USS Missouri launching a Tomahawk missile. The Gulf War was the last conflict in which battleships were deployed in a combat role.
Precision-guided munitions were heralded as key in allowing military strikes to be made with a minimum of civilian casualties compared to previous wars, although they were not used as often as more traditional, less accurate bombs. Specific buildings in downtown Baghdad could be bombed while journalists in their hotels watched cruise missiles fly by.[citation needed]
Precision-guided munitions amounted to approximately 7.4% of all bombs dropped by the coalition. Other bombs included cluster bombs, which disperse numerous submunitions,[343] and daisy cutters, 15,000-pound bombs which can disintegrate everything within hundreds of yards.[citation needed]
Global Positioning System (GPS) units were relatively new at the time and were important in enabling coalition units to easily navigate across the desert. Since military GPS receivers were not available for most troops, many used commercially available units. To permit these to be used to best effect, the "selective availability" feature of the GPS system was turned off for the duration of Desert Storm, allowing these commercial receivers to provide the same precision as the military equipment.[344]
Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) and satellite communication systems were also important. Two examples of this are the US Navy's Grumman E-2 Hawkeye and the US Air Force's Boeing E-3 Sentry. Both were used in command and control area of operations. These systems provided essential communications links between air, ground, and naval forces. It is one of several reasons coalition forces dominated the air war.[citation needed]
American-made color photocopiers were used to produce some of Iraq's battle plans. Some of the copiers contained concealed high-tech transmitters that revealed their positions to American electronic warfare aircraft, leading to more precise bombings.[345]
Scud and Patriot missiles
 Military personnel examine the remains of a Scud.
The role of Iraq's Scud missiles featured prominently in the war. Scud is a tactical ballistic missile that the Soviet Union developed and deployed among the forward deployed Soviet Army divisions in East Germany.[citation needed]
Scud missiles utilize inertial guidance which operates for the duration that the engines operate. Iraq used Scud missiles, launching them into both Saudi Arabia and Israel. Some missiles caused extensive casualties, while others caused little damage.[citation needed]
The US Patriot missile was used in combat for the first time. The US military claimed a high effectiveness against Scuds at the time, but later analysis gives figures as low as 9%, with 45% of the 158 Patriot launches being against debris or false targets.[346] The Dutch Ministry of Defense, which also sent Patriot missiles to protect civilians in Israel and Turkey, later disputed the higher claim.[144] Further, there is at least one incident of a software error causing a Patriot missile's failure to engage an incoming Scud, resulting in deaths.[347] Both the US Army and the missile manufacturers maintained the Patriot delivered a "miracle performance" in the Gulf War.[346]
Popular culture
The Gulf War has been the subject of several video games including Conflict: Desert Storm, Conflict: Desert Storm II and Gulf War: Operation Desert Hammer. There have also been numerous depictions in film including Jarhead (2005), which is based on US Marine Anthony Swofford's 2003 memoir of the same name.[348]
See also
1973 Samita border skirmish
2003 invasion of Iraq
United Nations Iraq Kuwait Observation Mission
Iraq Russia relations
SIPRI Arms Transfers Database, Iraq 1973 1990
Loss of Strength Gradient
Military history of the United States
Post World War II air-to-air combat losses
Organization of United States Air Force Units in the Gulf War
The Gulf War Did Not Take Place
Notes
^ a b 
The numbering of Persian Gulf conflicts depends on whether the Iran Iraq War (1980 1988) is referred to as the First (Persian) Gulf War (English language sources prior to the start of the Kuwait war in 1990 usually called it the Gulf War), which would make the 1990 war the Second (Persian) Gulf War. Different sources may call the conflicts by different names. The name 'Persian Gulf' is itself a subject of dispute. The start date of the Kuwait War can also be seen as either August 1990 (when Iraq's Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait) or as January 1991 (the start of Operation Desert Storm, when the US-led coalition forced Iraq out of Kuwait), so that the war is also often called the 1991 Gulf War, the 1990 1991 Gulf War, the 1990s Gulf War, etc ... This dating is also used to distinguish it from the other two 'Gulf Wars'.
^ The war is also known under other names, such as the Persian Gulf War, First Gulf War, Gulf War I, Kuwait War or First Iraq War.[a] The war was also codenamed by the United States-led coalition as Operation Desert Storm, preceded by Operation Desert Shield in the lead up to the  war when the coalition increased its presence in Saudi Arabia to prevent a potential all-out Iraqi invasion of the country.
^  Since 1988 the PLO had assumed, for Arab League purposes, the seat for the State of Palestine.
References
^ a b c "DESERT SHIELD AND DESERT STORM A CHRONOLOGY AND TROOP LIST FOR THE 1990 1991 PERSIAN GULF CRISIS" (PDF). apps.dtic.mil. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2018.
^ "Den 1. Golfkrig". Forsvaret.dk. 24 September 2010. Archived from the original on 12 January 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Haberman, Clyde (20 January 1991). "WAR IN THE GULF: Turkey; Turkey's Role in Air Assault Sets Off Fear of Retaliation (Published 1991)". The New York Times.
^ Persian Gulf War, the Sandhurst-trained PrinceKhaled bin Sultan al-Saud was co-commander with General Norman Schwarzkopf www.casi.org.uk/discuss Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine
^ General Khaled was Co-Commander, with US General Norman Schwarzkopf, of the allied coalition that liberated Kuwait www.thefreelibrary.com Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine
^ Gulf War coalition forces (latest available) by country "www.nationmaster.com". Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2007.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Hersh, Seymour (2005). Chain of Command. Penguin Books. p. 181.
^ a b "Persian Gulf War". MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on 1 November 2009.
^ 18 M1 Abrams, 11 M60, 2 AMX-30
^ CheckPoint, Ludovic Monnerat. "Guerre du Golfe : le dernier combat de la division Tawakalna".
^ Scales, Brig. Gen. Robert H.: Certain Victory. Brassey's, 1994, p. 279.
^ Halberstadt 1991. p. 35
^ Atkinson, Rick. Crusade, The untold story of the Persian Gulf War. Houghton Mifflin Company, 1993. pp. 332 3
^ Captain Todd A. Buchs, B. Co. Commander, Knights in the Desert. Publisher/Editor Unknown. p. 111.
^ Malory, Marcia. "Tanks During the First Gulf War  Tank History". Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2016.
^ M60 vs T-62 Cold War Combatants 1956 92 by Lon Nordeen & David Isby
^ "TAB H  Friendly-fire Incidents". Archived from the original on 1 June 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2016.
^ NSIAD-92-94, "Operation Desert Storm: Early Performance Assessment of Bradley and Abrams". Archived 21 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine US General Accounting Office, 10 January 1992. Quote: "According to information provided by the Army's Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Plans, 20 Bradleys were destroyed during the Gulf war. Another 12 Bradleys were damaged, but four of these were quickly repaired. Friendly fire accounted for 17 of the destroyed Bradleys and three of the damaged ones
^ Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait; 1990 (Air War) Archived 6 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Acig.org. Retrieved on 12 June 2011
^ a b c d e f g h Bourque (2001), p. 455.
^ "Appendix - Iraqi Death Toll | The Gulf War | FRONTLINE | PBS". www.pbs.org. Retrieved 24 July 2021.
^ a b Tucker-Jones, Anthony (31 May 2014). The Gulf War: Operation Desert Storm 1990 1991. ISBN 9781473837300. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022.
^ a b "Human Rights Watch". Archived from the original on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022.
^ "The Use of Terror during Iraq's invasion of Kuwait". The Jewish Agency for Israel. Archived from the original on 24 January 2005. Retrieved 22 June 2010.
^ "Kuwait: missing people: a step in the right direction". Red Cross. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 5 March 2014.
^ "The Wages of War: Iraqi Combatant and Noncombatant Fatalities in the 2003 Conflict". Project on Defense Alternatives. Retrieved 9 May 2009.
^ Abulhasan, Mohammad A. (2 August 1990). "Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council" (PDF). S/21423. United Nations OFFICIAL DOCUMENT SYSTEM.
^ Cooper, Tom; Sadik, Ahmad (6 August 2007). "Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait; 1990". Air Combat Information Group Journal. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2016.
^ "OPEC pressures Kuwait to moderate quota demand", New Straits Times, 7 June 1989
^ Gause, F. Gregory, III (2005). "The International Politics of the Gulf".  In Louise Fawcett (ed.). International Relations of the Middle East. Oxford: The University Press. pp. 263 274. ISBN 0-19-926963-7.
^ "DRAFT RESOLUTION /CANADA, COLOMBIA, C TE D'IVOIRE, ETHIOPIA, FINLAND, FRANCE, MALAYSIA, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND UNITED STATES OF AMERICA" (PDF). S/21425. United Nations OFFICIAL DOCUMENT SYSTEM. 2 August 1990.
^ a b "George Bush (Sr) Library   Margaret Thatcher Foundation". www.margaretthatcher.org.
^ Peters, John E; Deshong, Howard (1995). Out of Area or Out of Reach? European Military Support for Operations in Southwest Asia (PDF). RAND Corporation. ISBN 978-0-8330-2329-2.
^ "Mem ria Globo". Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 26 March 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link), access on 29 March 2011.
^ "Livraria da Folha  Livro conta como Guerra do Golfo colocou a CNN no foco internacional  08/09/2010". .folha.uol.com.br. Retrieved 13 May 2011.
^ A Guerra do Golfo Archived 4 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine, accessed on 29 March 2011
^ Guerra/Terrorismo   O maior bombardeio da hist ria Archived 26 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, access on 27 November 2011.
^ a b Logan Nye (16 April 2021). "These were the 6 most massive tank battles in US history". We Are The Mighty. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
^ "Frontline Chronology". Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved 20 March 2007.
^ "Tenth anniversary of the Gulf War: A look back". CNN. 16 January 2001. Archived from the original on 22 October 2007. Retrieved 6 June 2007.
^ Kenneth Estes. "ISN: The Second Gulf War (1990 1991)  Council on Foreign Relations". Cfr.org. Archived from the original on 2 January 2011. Retrieved 18 March 2010.
^ Operation Iraqi Freedom: Strategies, Approaches, Results, and Issues for Congress Archived 5 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine. (PDF). Retrieved on 2014-05-24.
^ "A 1991 Dossier on the Role of the Iraqi Air Force in the Gulf War" (PDF). 5 November 1991. SH-AADF-D-000-396.
^ Sciolino, Elaine (1991). The Outlaw State: Saddam Hussein's Quest for Power and the Gulf Crisis. John Wiley & Sons. p. 160. ISBN 9780471542995.
^ Sciolino, Elaine (1991). The Outlaw State: Saddam Hussein's Quest for Power and the Gulf Crisis. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 161-162. ISBN 9780471542995.
^ a b c d Stork, Joe; Lesch, Ann M. (1990). "Background to the Crisis: Why War?". Middle East Report. Middle East Research and Information Project (MERIP) (167, November December 1990): 11 18. doi:10.2307/3012998. JSTOR 3012998. (subscription required)
^ Sciolino, Elaine (1991). The Outlaw State: Saddam Hussein's Quest for Power and the Gulf Crisis. John Wiley & Sons. p. 163. ISBN 9780471542995.
^ Douglas A. Borer (2003). "Inverse Engagement: Lessons from U.S.-Iraq Relations, 1982 1990". U.S. Army Professional Writing Collection. US Army. Archived from the original on 11 October 2006. Retrieved 12 October 2006.
^ Sciolino, Elaine (1991). The Outlaw State: Saddam Hussein's Quest for Power and the Gulf Crisis. John Wiley & Sons. p. 164. ISBN 9780471542995.
^ Simons (2003), p. 333. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ a b Simons (2003), pp. 341 342. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ "On this day in 1990: The world decides to stop Saddam Hussein's forces marauding around Kuwait". The Daily Telegraph. 30 November 2017. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.
^ a b Simons (2003), pp. 343 344. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ Simons (2003), pp. 339 340. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ a b Simons (2003), p. 341. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ Cleveland, William L. A History of the Modern Middle East. 2nd Ed pg. 464
^ Hayes, Thomas C. (3 September 1990). "Confrontation in the Gulf; The Oilfield Lying Below the Iraq-Kuwait Dispute". The New York Times. Oil formations frequently run beneath political boundaries, whether they involve unfriendly leaseholders in West Texas or neighboring Arab states, and procedures have existed for years to settle disputes that arise. Typically, participants in the same field share both production costs and revenues, using a formula that sets percentages of ownership. But Iraq refused to negotiate with Kuwait on such an agreement. So Kuwait produced oil from Rumaila without any agreement, and then adopted a policy of producing far more oil than it was allowed under the quota system of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. ... But during the [Iran Iraq War] Iraq mined its giant share of the Rumaila field to keep it from falling into Iranian hands, Western political experts say. Kuwait stepped up its total oil production, capturing some of Iraq's customers and pumping millions of barrels from the Rumaila field. ... Some Iraqi officials have accused Kuwait in the past of using advanced drilling techniques developed by American oilfield specialists to siphon oil from the Rumaila field, a charge that American drillers deny, noting that the oil flows easily from the Rumaila field without any need for these techniques. ... W. C. Goins, senior vice president of OGE Drilling Inc., a Houston company that provided oilfield supervisors and workers for Kuwait in the same area, said he was 'positive' all of the wells his employees drilled and operated ran vertically down to the Rumaila pay zone. 'That field crosses the border in north Kuwait,' he added. 'Iraqis were drilling on one side, and Kuwaitis on the other side.'
^ a b Simons (2003), p. 334. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ Simons (2003), p. 335. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ Simons (2003), p. 336. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ Simons (2003), pp. 337 338. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ Simons (2003), p. 338. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ a b Simons (2003), p. 343. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFSimons2003 (help)
^ Yousseff M. Ibrahim, "Iraq Threatens Emirates And Kuwait on Oil Glut" Archived 30 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine New York Times, 18 July 1990
^ Michael R. Gordon, "U.S. Deploys Air and Sea Forces After Iraq Threatens 2 Neighbors" Archived 30 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine New York Times, 25 July 1990
^ a b Finlan (2003), pp. 25 26.
^ "Interrogator Shares Saddam's Confessions". cbsnews.com.
^ a b c "CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF; Excerpts From Iraqi Document on Meeting With U.S. Envoy" Archived 11 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine New York Times, 23 September 1990
^ "Saddam's message of friendship to president Bush (Wikileaks telegram 90BAGHDAD4237)". US Department of State. 25 July 1990. Archived from the original on 7 January 2011. Retrieved 2 January 2011.
^ Ibrahim, Youssef M. (26 July 1990). "Iraq Said to Prevail in Oil Dispute With Kuwait and Arab Emirates". The New York Times.
^ a b c "The Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm Timeline". Archived from the original on 26 May 2008. Retrieved 30 June 2010.
^ a b Finlan (2003), p. 26.
^ a b "Kuwait: Organization and Mission of the Forces". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 14 April 2012.
^ Finlan (2003), p. 25.
^ Childs, John; Corvisier, Andr  (1994). A Dictionary of Military History and the Art of War. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 403. ISBN 978-0-631-16848-5.
^ Knights, Michael (2005). Cradle of Conflict: Iraq and the Birth of Modern U.S. Military Power. United States Naval Institute. p. 20]. ISBN 978-1-59114-444-1.
^ Dan Vaught. "Eyewitness, Col. Fred Hart 1". Users.lighthouse.net. Archived from the original on 18 August 2009. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Cooper, Tom; Sadik, Ahmad (16 September 2003). "Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait; 1990". Air Combat Information Group. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2010.
^ "Iraqis loot Kuwait's central bank of gold, cash". UPI.
^ "The Stolen Dinars of Kuwait   PMG". www.pmgnotes.com.
^ "Iran, Israel and the Shi'ite Crescent" (PDF). S. Daniel Abraham Center for Strategic Dialogue. pp. 14 15. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 November 2014. Retrieved 5 March 2014.
^ Al-Marashi, Ibrahim (Winter 2003). "Saddam's Security Apparatus During the Invasion of Kuwait and the Kuwaiti Resistance". The Journal of Intelligence History. 3 (2): 74 75. doi:10.1080/16161262.2003.10555087. S2CID 157844796.
^ "Two ethnicities, three generations: Phonological variation and change in Kuwait" (PDF). Newcastle University. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2014.
^ a b Levins, John M. (March 1995). "The Kuwaiti Resistance". Middle East Forum.
^ "Presentation on Gulf Oil Disruption" (PDF). wpainc.com. 22 May 1984. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 17 January 2017.
^ a b Finlan (2003), p. 29.
^ a b "Report of the Security Council: 16 June 1990  15 June 1991". Report of the Security Council (digital document). New York: United Nations: 30. 1993. ISSN 0082-8238.
^ "Myths & Facts  The Gulf Wars". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 13 May 2011.
^ a b Ziad Swaidan; Mihai Nica (June 2002). "The 1991 Gulf War And Jordan's Economy". Middle East Review of International Affairs. 6 (2). Archived from the original on 4 August 2002.
^ Deese, David A. "Persian Gulf War, Desert Storm  War with Iraqi". The History Professor. Concord Learning Systems. Archived from the original on 14 January 2005.
^ "Report of the Security Council: 16 June 1990  15 June 1991". Report of the Security Council. New York: United Nations: 33 35. 1993. ISSN 0082-8238.
^ "Resolution 661 (1990)". United Nations. Retrieved 13 April 2012.
^ "Report of the Security Council: 16 June 1990  15 June 1991". Report of the Security Council. New York: United Nations: 52 53. 1993. ISSN 0082-8238.
^ Lori Fisler Damrosch, International Law, Cases and Materials, West Group, 2001
^ a b Friedman, Thomas L. (22 August 1990). "Confrontation in the Gulf: Behind Bush's Hard Line; Washington Considers a Clear Iraqi Defeat To Be Necessary to Bolster Its Arab Allies". The New York Times. New York. pp. A1. Retrieved 16 September 2010.
^ "Confrontation in the Gulf; Proposals by Iraqi President: Excerpts From His Address". The New York Times. New York. 13 August 1990. pp. A8. Retrieved 17 October 2010.
^ a b Waldman, Shmuel (2005). Beyond a Reasonable Doubt. Feldheim Publishers, p. 179. ISBN 1-58330-806-7
^ BBC News. "1990: Outrage at Iraqi TV hostage show Archived 1 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine". Retrieved 2 September 2007.
^ Royce, Knut (29 August 1990). "MIDDLE EAST CRISIS Secret Offer Iraq Sent Pullout Deal to U.S". Newsday. New York. Retrieved 17 October 2010.
^ Royce, Knut (3 January 1991). "Iraq Offers Deal to Quit Kuwait U.S. rejects it, but stays 'interested'". Newsday Washington Bureau. Long Island, N.Y. p. 5. Retrieved 24 October 2010.
^ Tyler, Patrick E. (3 January 1991). "CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF; Arafat Eases Stand on Kuwait-Palestine Link". The New York Times. New York. Retrieved 17 October 2010.
^ Friedman, Thomas L. (11 January 1991). "CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF; As U.S. Officials See It, Hands of Aziz Were Tied". The New York Times. pp. A10. Retrieved 30 September 2010.
^ See Paul Lewis, "Confrontation in the Gulf: The U.N.; France and 3 Arab States Issue an Appeal to Hussein," New York Times, 15 January 1991, p. A12
^ Michael Kranish et al., "World waits on brink of war: Late effort at diplomacy in gulf fails," Boston Globe, 16 January 1991, p. 1
^ Ellen Nimmons, A.P., "Last-ditch pitches for peace; But U.S. claims Iraqis hold key," Houston Chronicle, 15 January 1991, p. 1
^ Alan Riding, "CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: France; Paris Says Its Last-Ditch Peace Effort Has Failed" Archived 26 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine New York Times 16 January 1991
^ Gilles Kepel Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam.
^ "15 Years After Desert Storm, U.S. Commitment to Region Continues". Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 29 March 2007.
^ "U.S., Saudi Forces Start 'Imminent Thunder' Exercise in Gulf". AP NEWS. Retrieved 20 May 2021.
^ Gen. Schwarzkopf's Famed News Conference, archived from the original on 1 September 2021, retrieved 20 May 2021
^ "UN Security Council Resolution 678, Iraq / Kuwait". Council on Foreign Relations. 29 November 1990. Archived from the original on 14 June 2009.
^ New York Times, 10 Apr. 1991, "Egypt's 'Reward': Forgiven Debt Archived 18 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b New Statesman, 23 September 2002, "John Pilger Reveals How the Bushes Bribe the World, from Russia to Iran Archived 18 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine"
^ Baker, James Addison, and Thomas M. DeFrank. The Politics of Diplomacy: Revolution, War, and Peace, 1989 1992. New York: Putnam, 1995.
^ "Gulf war fast facts". CNN Editorial Research. 2020. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020.
^ "The Unfinished War: A Decade Since Desert Storm". CNN In-Depth Specials. 2001. Archived from the original on 17 March 2008. Retrieved 5 April 2008.
^ "The Gulf War: Moscow's role". CNN. 2001. Retrieved 18 October 2020.
^ Freedman, Lawrence, and Efraim Karsh. The Gulf Conflict 1990 1991: Diplomacy and War in the New World Order. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1993. Print.
^ Lynch, Colum (1 November 2006). "Security Council Seat Tied to Aid". The Washington Post. Retrieved 18 March 2010.
^ Bush, George H. W. (11 September 1990). "Address Before a Joint Session of Congress". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on 16 January 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Heller, Jean (6 January 1991). "Photos don't show buildup". St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on 4 February 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2012.
^ Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Volume 59, page 33, Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science (Chicago, Ill.), Atomic Scientists of Chicago, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists (Organization), 2003.
^ "How PR Sold the War in the Persian Gulf | Center for Media and Democracy". Prwatch.org. 28 October 2004. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ a b Rowse, Ted (1992). "Kuwaitgate  killing of Kuwaiti babies by Iraqi soldiers exaggerated". Washington Monthly.
^ John R. MacArthur, Second Front: Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1992)
^ Makiya (1993), p. 40.
^ Makiya (1993), pp. 31 33.
^ Makiya (1993), p. 32.
^ New York Times, 24 Oct. 1990, "Mideast Tensions; No Compromise on Kuwait, Bush Says Archived 12 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine"
^ Edwin E. Mo se. "Limited War : The Stereotypes". Clemson University. Retrieved 2 July 2010.
^ "CNN.com In-depth specials   Gulf War (via Internet Archive)". CNN. 2001. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2008.
^ Lee, Robin J. (2002). "Fixed-Wing Combat Aircraft Attrition in Desert Storm". Retrieved 30 January 2012. Sources: Gulf War Airpower Survey, Vol. 5; Norman Friedman, Desert Victory; World Air Power Journal. Additionally, Mark Bovankovich and LT Chuck Chase offered corrections and several intriguing details on these incidents. All errors, however, remain entirely mine.
^ Atkinson, Rick (1994). Crusade: The Untold Story of the Persian Gulf War. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, p. 47. ISBN 0-395-71083-9
^ Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh, The Gulf Conflict: Diplomacy and War in the New World Order, 1990 1991 (Princeton, 1993), 332.
^ "Geneva Meeting on Persian Gulf Crisis". C-SPAN. 9 January 1991. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 18 March 2010.
^ Rostker, Bernard (2000). "Information Paper: Iraq's Scud Ballistic Missiles". Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control from 2000 to 2006. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2009.
^ Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh, The Gulf Conflict: Diplomacy and War in the New World Order, 1990 1991 (Princeton, 1993), 331 41.
^ Thomas, Gordon, Gideon's Spies: The Secret History of the Mossad
^ a b "The day Israel's wars changed forever". The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com. Retrieved 1 March 2022.
^ Fetter, Steve; Lewis, George N.; Gronlund, Lisbeth (28 January 1993). "Why were Casualties so low?" (PDF). Nature. London: Nature Publishing Group. 361 (6410): 293 296. doi:10.1038/361293a0. hdl:1903/4282. S2CID 4343235.
^ "The Gulf War (1991)". Retrieved 5 July 2016.
^ Fetter, Steve; Lewis, George N.; Gronlund, Lisbeth (28 January 1993). "Why were Casualties so low?" (PDF). Nature. London. 361 (6410): 293 296. doi:10.1038/361293a0. hdl:1903/4282. S2CID 4343235.
^ "Three Israelis killed as Scuds hit Tel Aviv". The Tech. 1991. Retrieved 11 January 2009.
^ a b "Betrokkenheid van Nederland" (in Dutch). Ministerie van Defensie. 2009. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 11 January 2009.
^ Kifner, John (23 January 1991). "WAR IN THE GULF: TEL AVIV; 3 DIE 96 ARE HURT IN ISRAELI SUBURB". The New York Times.
^ Atkinson, Rick; Balz, Dan (23 January 1991). "Scud Hits Tel Aviv, Leaving 3 Dead, 96 Hurt". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2 June 2013.
^ Cheney, Richard: In My Time: A Personal and Political Memoir
^ Ottaway, David B. (31 August 1990). "SAUDI KING FAHD ORDERS GAS MASKS FOR EVERYONE". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ "DOD: Information Paper- Iraq's Scud Ballistic Missiles". Iraqwatch.org. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 18 March 2010.
^ U. S. Government Accountability Office. "Patriot Missile Defense: Software Problem Led to System Failure at Dhahran, Saudi Arabia". www.gao.gov. Retrieved 25 January 2022.
^ "Washingtonpost.com: Fog of War - Post Archive". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ Wilkinson, Jeff (29 May 2016). "25 years ago, this University of South Carolina graduate gave his life in Desert Storm". The State. Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ AirLand Reversal Archived 19 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Air Force Magazine. 1 February 2014.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Desert Storm/Shield Valorous Unit Award Citations.[full citation needed]
^ Hillman, p. 6. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFHillman (help)
^ Bourque (2001), p. 95.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 96.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 98.
^ a b Bourque (2001), p. 99.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 102.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 103.
^ a b c Bourque (2001), p. 159.
^ a b c Bourque (2001), p. 160.
^ Bourque (2001), pp. 159 160.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 164.
^ a b Bourque (2001), p. 161.
^ a b "The Gulf War and "European Artillery"   The Campaign for the National Museum of the United States Army". 20 January 2015.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 163.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 201.
^ Bourque (2001), pp. 156 157.
^ a b c Bourque (2001), p. 206.
^ a b c Bourque (2001), p. 207.
^ a b Bourque (2001), p. 225.
^ Bourque (2001), pp. 113 133.
^ a b Bourque (2001), p. 259.
^ "CORRECTING MYTHS ABOUT THE PERSIAN GULF WAR: THE LAST STAND OF THE TAWAKALNA". 30 April 2015.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 194.
^ Lingamfelter P.190-191
^ a b "These were the 6 most massive tank battles in US history". 24 March 2016.
^ a b Chenoweth, H. Avery (2005). Semper Fi: The Definitive Illustrated History of the U.S. Marines. p. 408.
^ "VII Corps leads armored surge into Iraq WAR IN THE GULF".
^ Bourque (2001), p. 90.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 473.
^ Dinackus (2000), p. 4 10.
^ "Operations DESERT SHIELD and DESERT STORM: Valorous Unit Award Citations | Unit Award Orders & Citations | U.S. Army Center of Military History".
^ Bourque & Burdan (2007), p. 275. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFBourqueBurdan2007 (help)
^ Bourque & Burdan (2007), p. 377. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFBourqueBurdan2007 (help)
^ Logan Nye (22 April 2022). "These were the 6 most massive tank battles in US history". We Are The Mighty. Retrieved 9 May 2022.
^ "Jayhawk Goes to War: VII Corps in Operation DESERT STORM   The Campaign for the National Museum of the United States Army". Armyhistory.org. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
^ Bourque (2001), pp. 75, 92.
^ a b Bourque (2001), p. 107.
^ a b c d Bourque (2001), p. 244.
^ a b c Paul W. Westermeyer (28 January   1 February 1991). "The Battle of al-Khafji" (PDF). U.S. Marines in Battle.
^ Blitzkrieg in the Gulf by Yves Debay
^ U.S. Marines in the Persian Gulf, 1990-1991 With the 1st U.S. Marine Division in Desert Shield and Desert Storm. pp.92-93.
^ Nordeen & Isby (2010), p. 66. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFNordeenIsby2010 (help)
^ a b c d Nordeen & Isby (2010), p. 73. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFNordeenIsby2010 (help)
^ U.S. Marines in the Persian Gulf, 1990-1991 With the 1st U.S. Marine Division in Desert Shield and Desert Storm Cureton P.94
^ Col H. Avery Chenoweth (2005) Semper Fi: The Definitive Illustrated History of the U.S. Marines
^ a b "History of Bravo Company, 4th Tank Battalion in Desert Storm 1991". Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2019.
^ M60 vs T-62 Cold War Combatants 1956 92, Nordeen & Isby, p.73
^ "M60: This Old Tank Crushed Saddam Hussein During the First Gulf War". 22 April 2020.
^ Nordeen & Isby (2010), p. 74. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFNordeenIsby2010 (help)
^ Dunstan P.8
^ Bourque (2001), p. 260.
^ a b Bourque (2001), p. 275.
^ a b c d Bourque (2001), p. 377.
^ Halberstadt P.117, 121
^ Bourque (2001), p. 319.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 265.
^ "The British Challenger 1 Main Battle Tank".
^ Bourque (2001), p. 43.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 350.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 324.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 185.
^ a b c d Bourque (2001), p. 243.
^ a b Bourque (2001), p. 19.
^ Bourque (2001), pp. 333 337.
^ U.S. Marines in the Persian Gulf, 1990-1991 With the 1st U.S. Marine Division in Desert Shield and Desert Storm Cureton P.97
^ "Persian Gulf War". MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on 1 November 2009.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 471.
^ Carhart, Tom (1994). Iron Soldiers: How America's 1st Armored Division Crushed Iraq's Elite Republican Guard. New York: Random House. p.323 ISBN 0671791656
^ Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2017.
^ Bourque (2001), p. 375.
^ Rosenthal, Andrew (28 February 1991). "War in the Gulf: Bush Halts Offensive Combat; Kuwait Freed, Iraqis Crushed". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 February 2023.
^ International, Radio Canada (6 November 2015). "History: November 6, 1991 Canadians cap the last oil fire in the Gulf War". RCI | English. Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ Riley (2010), p. 207.
^ a b c d e f Screaming Eagles 101st Airborne Division by Russ & Susan Bryant P.85
^ Andrew Leydon. "Carriers in the Persian Gulf War". Leyden.com. Retrieved 18 March 2010.
^ Screaming Eagles: The 101st Airborne Division from D-Day to Desert Storm by Christopher J Anderson P.8
^ Twentieth Century Battlefields, "The Gulf War".
^ Holsti, Ole R. (7 November 2011). "The United States and Iraq before the Iraq War". American Public Opinion on the Iraq War. University of Michigan Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-472-03480-2. Air attacks inflicted heavy casualties on retreatng forces along what became known as 'the highway of death.' American, British, and French units pursued the Iraqis to within 150 miles of Baghdad.
^ Fisk, Robert. The Great War for Civilisation, Vintage (2007 reprint), at p. 646.
^ "Flashback: the 1991 Iraqi revolt". 21 August 2007. Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ a b "ENDLESS TORMENT, The 1991 Uprising in Iraq And Its Aftermath". Hrw.org. Archived from the original on 15 June 2010. Retrieved 25 September 2009.
^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "Refworld | Human Rights Watch World Report 1992   Iraq and Occupied Kuwait". UNHCR. Retrieved 14 August 2013.
^ "Abbas apology to Kuwait over Iraq". BBC News. 12 December 2004.
^ ""Cheney changed his view on Iraq", by Charles Pope, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 29 September 2004". 28 September 2004. Retrieved 7 January 2005.
^ New York Times, 15 Mar. 1991, "After the War: Kuwait: Kuwaiti Emir, Tired and Tearful, Returns to His Devastated Land Archived 12 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine"
^ a b Crocker III, H. W. (2006). Don't Tread on Me. New York: Crown Forum. p. 384. ISBN 978-1-4000-5363-6.
^ "Splitting the Check: When Allies Helped Pay for Middle East War". NBC News. Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ Odgers 1999, pp. 356 371.
^ "La Armada Argentina en el Golfo". Fuerzas Navales Magazine. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2020.
^ "Overview of U.S. Policy Toward South America and the President's Upcoming Trip to the Region". Retrieved 14 January 2020.
^ Morin, Jean H.; Gimblett, Richard Howard (1997). Operation Friction, 1990 1991: The Canadian Forces in the Persian Gulf. Dundurn Press. p. 170. ISBN 978-1-55002-257-5.
The Canadian Commander in the Middle East was Commodore Kenneth J. Summers.
^ "25 years from the "Locust" operation". 25 September 2015.
^ "Iraq (1990)". Minestero Della Difesa (in Italian).
^ "Celebrato il 93  Anniversario dell'Aeronautica Militare - Aviation Report" (in Italian). Retrieved 1 February 2018.
^ "Desert Storm Part 22: Charge of the Heavy Brigade". British Army Official Blog. 28 February 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.
^ "Desert Storm Part 24: Back to Germany". British Army Official Blog. 11 March 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.
^ "The Use of Terror During Iraq's Invasion of Kuwait". 22 August 2007.
^ "Iraq and Kuwait Discuss Fate of 600 Missing Since Gulf War". Los Angeles Times. 9 January 2003.
^ Scott Peterson, "'Smarter' bombs still hit civilians" Archived 9 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Christian Science Monitor, 22 October 2002.
^ Tucker (2010), p. 265.
^ a b "Wages of War  Appendix 2: Iraqi Combatant and Noncombatant Fatalities in the 1991 Gulf War". Comw.org. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ New York Times, 3 June 1991, "U.S. Officials Believe Iraq Will Take Years to Rebuild Archived 18 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine"
^ a b Robert Fisk, The Great War For Civilisation; The Conquest of the Middle East (Fourth Estate, 2005), p.853.
^ "Toting the Casualties of War". Businessweek. 6 February 2003. Archived from the original on 19 February 2003.
^ Ford, Peter (9 April 2003). "Bid to stem civilian deaths tested". Christian Science Monitor.
^ Collateral damage: The health and environmental costs of war on Iraq Archived 19 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Medact
^ "9". www.hrw.org. Retrieved 6 May 2022.
^ New York Times, 22 March 1991 "After the War; U.N. Survey Calls Iraq's War Damage Near-Apocalyptic Archived 18 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine"
^ Keaney, Thomas; Eliot A. Cohen (1993). Gulf War Air Power Survey. United States Dept. of the Air Force. ISBN 978-0-16-041950-8.
^ al-Khalil, Samir. "Iraq and Its Future | by Samir al-Khalil | The New York Review of Books"   via www.nybooks.com. {{cite magazine}}: Cite magazine requires |magazine= (help)
^ a b c Makiya & New York Review of Books (1991). sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMakiyaNew_York_Review_of_Books1991 (help)
^ a b c d e f "In-Depth Specials   Gulf War". CNN. 2001. Archived from the original on 2001.
^ Ranter, Harro. "ASN Aircraft accident Lockheed C-130H Hercules 469 Rash Mishab". Retrieved 5 July 2016.
^ "Roll of Honour". Britains-smallwars.com. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2011.
^ "Saudi Arabia  Persian Gulf War, 1991". Country-data.com. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ a b c Schmitt, Eric (22 March 1991). "After the War" Archived 20 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times.
^ "Soldier Reported Dead Shows Up at Parents' Doorstep" Archived 3 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Associated Press. 22 March 1991.
^ "The Role of the United Arab Emirates in the Iran-Iraq War and the Persian Gulf War". Country-data.com. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Miller, Judith. "Syria Plans to Double Gulf Force." The New York Times, 27 March 1991.
^ "Muere en accidente de tr fico en Abu Dabi un cabo de la fragata 'Victoria'" [Corporal of the frigate "Victoria" dies in traffic accident in Abu Dhabi]. El Pa s (in Spanish). 14 March 1991. Retrieved 13 July 2022.
^ "Role of Kuwaiti Armed Forces in the Persian Gulf War". Country-data.com. 24 February 1991. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ "FESTA, LACRIME E AMAREZZA PER I MARO' RIENTRATI DAL GOLFO". la Repubblica (in Italian). Taranto. 2 March 1991. Retrieved 13 July 2022.
^ "podporu k in memoriam Petr  IMONKA | inmemoriam.army.cz". inmemoriam.army.cz. Retrieved 19 April 2022.
^ Sornas, Ladislav (15 July 2021). "St eleck  sout  - Memori l ppor. Petra  imonky". Sdru en  v le n ch veter n   R (in Czech). Retrieved 19 April 2022.
^ Tucker (2010), p. 470.
^ Blanford, Nicholas (2001). "Kuwait hopes for answers on its Gulf War POWs". Christian Science Monitor.
^ Tucker (2010), p. 264.
^ Persian Gulf War  MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on 21 October 2009.
^ "The Cost of Women in Combat". ABC News. Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ Tucker (2010), p. 207.
^ "Gulf War Veterans' Medically Unexplained Illnesses". U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Retrieved 25 February 2014.
^ "Gulf war syndrome; higher rates of specific birth defects in gulf war veterans' children". Medical Letter on the CDC & FDA, 14. 2003. ProQuest 211397084.
^ Haley, Robert W.; Kramer, Gerald; Xiao, Junhui; Dever, Jill A.; Teiber, John F. (11 May 2022). "Evaluation of a Gene Environment Interaction of PON1 and Low-Level Nerve Agent Exposure with Gulf War Illness: A Prevalence Case Control Study Drawn from the U.S. Military Health Survey's National Population Sample". Environmental Health Perspectives. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. 130 (5): 57001. doi:10.1289/EHP9009. PMC 9093163. PMID 35543525. S2CID 248694742. cf. "UTSW genetic study confirms sarin nerve gas as cause of Gulf War illness". University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. 11 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. For Gulf War veterans with the QQ genotype, hearing nerve agent alarms a proxy for chemical exposure raised their chance of developing GWI by 3.75 times. For those with the QR genotype, the alarms raised their chance of GWI by 4.43 times. And for those with two copies of the R gene, inefficient at breaking down sarin, the chance of GWI increased by 8.91 times. Those soldiers with both the RR genotype and low-level sarin exposure were over seven times more likely to get GWI due to the interaction per se, over and above the increase in risk from both risk factors acting alone. For genetic epidemiologists, this number leads to a high degree of confidence that sarin is a causative agent of GWI.
^ Elizabeth Neuffer Iraqis Trace Surge in Cancer to US Bombings Archived 2 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine Boston Globe 26 January 2003, Page: A11 Section: National/Foreign
^ Larry Johnson Iraqi cancers, birth defects blamed on U.S. depleted uranium Archived 20 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine Seattle Post-Intelligencer 12 November 2002. Retrieved 25 January 2009.
^ Ron McKay (14 January 2001). "Depleted Uranium: The Horrific Legacy of Basra". Sunday Herald. Scotland. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013. Retrieved 15 February 2013.
^ "WHO Data, 2004". Retrieved 4 September 2013.
^ "Doctor's Gulf War Studies Link Cancer to Depleted Uranium". The New York Times. 29 January 2001.
^ Hindin R.;  et al. (2005). "Teratogenicity of depleted uranium aerosols: A review from an epidemiological perspective". Environmental Health. 4 (1): 17. doi:10.1186/1476-069X-4-17. PMC 1242351. PMID 16124873.
^ Marshall, AC (2005). "An Analysis of Uranium Dispersal and Health Effects Using a Gulf War Case Study" (PDF). Sandia National Laboratories. Retrieved 16 July 2012.
^ US Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration. "Depleted Uranium - Public Health". www.publichealth.va.gov.
^ "Depleted Uranium Health Effects". ead.anl.gov. Archived from the original on 6 April 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ Chediac, Joyce. "The massacre of withdrawing Soldieers on the highway of death". Archived from the original on 14 August 2014.
^ Clancy & Horner 1999, pp. 499 500.
^ a b c d Sloyan, Patrick. "Iraqis Buried Alive  U.S. Attacked With Bulldozers During War Ground Attack" Archived 30 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The Seattle Times. 12 September 1991. Retrieved 4 March 2014.
^ a b Sloyan, Patrick Day (12 September 1991), "Buried Alive: U.S. Tanks Used Plows To Kill Thousands in Gulf War Trenches", Newsday, New York, p. 1
^ "The gulf war: appendix: Iraqi death toll". Frontline. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
^ Simpson, John (2003), The Wars Against Saddam, Basingstoke: MacMillan
^ a b c Shafeeq Ghabra (8 May 1991). "The PLO in Kuwait".
^ Yann Le Troquer; Rozenn Hommery al-Oudat (Spring 1999). "From Kuwait to Jordan: The Palestinians' Third Exodus". Journal of Palestine Studies. 28 (3): 37 51. doi:10.2307/2538306. JSTOR 2538306.
^ "Jordanians of Kuwait". Joshua Project. 2013.
^ "Palestinians Open Kuwaiti Embassy". Al Monitor. 23 May 2013. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013.
^ "Yemen's president flees for medical treatment as search for new leader begins Archived 22 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine". The Daily Telegraph. 5 June 2011
^ 23 June 1991, Washington Post, Bart Gellman
^ "The View From France: America's Unyielding Policy toward Iraq," Foreign Affairs, Vol. 74, No. 1, January/February 1995, pp.61 62
^ Rubin, Michael (December 2001). "Sanctions on Iraq: A Valid Anti-American Grievance?" (PDF). Middle East Review of International Affairs. 5 (4): 100 115. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 September 2006. Retrieved 24 May 2017.
^ "Frontline: War Stories". Pbs.org. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Patrice O'Shaughness. "Gulf War POW denounces abuse of Iraqi detainees". New York Daily News. 12 May 2004.
^ "The Flight That Changed My Life". Johnnichol.com. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ "War Story:John Peters". Pbs.org. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ The One that Got Away by Chris Ryan & Bravo Two Zero by Andy McNab
^ "A Woman's Burden". Time. 28 March 2003. Archived from the original on 4 April 2003.
^ a b "US pulls out of Saudi Arabia". BBC News. 29 April 2003. Retrieved 29 November 2009.
^ Plotz, David (2001) What Does Osama Bin Laden Want? Archived 10 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Slate
^ Bergen, Peter L. (2001). Holy War Inc. Simon & Schuster. p. 3.
^ Yusufzai, Rahimullah (26 September 2001). "Face to face with Osama". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 19 January 2008. Retrieved 30 June 2010.
^ "Iraq surveys show 'humanitarian emergency'". UNICEF. 12 August 1999. Archived from the original on 6 August 2009. Retrieved 29 November 2009.
^ Spagat, Michael (September 2010). "Truth and death in Iraq under sanctions" (PDF). Significance. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2012.
^ Rubin, Michael (December 2001). "Sanctions on Iraq: A Valid Anti-American Grievance?". Middle East Review of International Affairs. 5 (4): 100 115. Archived from the original on 28 October 2012.
^ a b "Marsh Arabs". American University School of International Service. Archived from the original on 27 June 2010. Retrieved 1 August 2010.
^ a b Jeffrey Pollack (March April 2003). "Duke Magazine-Oil Spill-After the Deluge". Duke Magazine. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Note: The cited supporting source[325] uses the term Arabian Gulf to name this body of water. This article uses the proper name Persian Gulf. For more information, see the Persian Gulf naming dispute article.
^ "V: "Thunder And Lightning"- The War With Iraq (Subsection:The War at Sea)". The United States Navy in "Desert Shield" / "Desert Storm". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 5 December 2006. Retrieved 26 November 2006.
^ Leckie, Robert (1998). The Wars of America. Castle Books. ISBN 9780785809142.
^ Wellman, Robert Campbell (14 February 1999). ""Iraq and Kuwait: 1972, 1990, 1991, 1997." Earthshots: Satellite Images of Environmental Change". U.S. Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 28 October 2002. Retrieved 27 July 2010.
^ Husain, T. (1995). Kuwaiti Oil Fires: Regional Environmental Perspectives. Oxford: BPC Wheatons Ltd. p. 68.
^ a b "How much did the Gulf War cost the US?". People.psych.cornell.edu. 20 May 1997. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Johnston, Louis; Williamson, Samuel H. (2023). "What Was the U.S. GDP Then?". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved 1 January 2023. United States Gross Domestic Product deflator figures follow the Measuring Worth series. 
^ a b "The Impact of the Gulf Crisis on Developing Countries". ODI Briefing Paper. March 1991. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. Retrieved 29 June 2011.
^ Peter Ruff (31 July 2006). "Obituary : Bob Simpson". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 4 September 2011.
^ Lori Robertson (2007). "Images of War". AJR. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2007.
^ Ken Jarecke's account to the BBC World Service programme (9 May 2005). "Picture power: Death of an Iraqi soldier". BBC News. Retrieved 14 October 2010.
^ Lucas, Dean (2007). "Famous Pictures Magazine  Iraqi Soldier". Famous Pictures Magazine. Retrieved 23 May 2013.
^ "Series (The Gulf Crisis TV Project)". archive.org. 11 July 2010. Archived from the original on 11 July 2010. Retrieved 17 January 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ "War, Oil and Power". Retrieved 17 January 2017   via Internet Archive.
^ "News World Order". Retrieved 17 January 2017   via Internet Archive.
^ Naureckas, Jim (April 1991). "Gulf War Coverage: The Worst Censorship Was at Home". Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR). Archived from the original on 6 April 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2010.
^ Iraq and the Second Gulf War: State Building and Regime Security, Mohammad-Mahmoud Mohamedou, 1997
^ "Dumb Bombs". Fas.org. Archived from the original on 28 March 2010. Retrieved 18 March 2010.
^ McNamara, Joel (2007). GPS for Dummies. ISBN 9780470199237.
^ "Something wrong with our **** chips today". The Economist. 7 April 2011. Retrieved 13 June 2011.
^ a b Cirincione, Joseph (October 1992). "The Performance of the Patriot Missile in the war" (PDF). Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 December 2003. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
^ "The Patriot Missile Failure". Ima.umn.edu. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
^ Adams, Tim (23 March 2003). "Observer review: Jarhead by Anthony Swofford". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 13 June 2018.
Works cited
Bourque, Stephen A. (2001). Jayhawk! The 7th Corps in the Persian Gulf War. Center of Military History, United States Army. LCCN 2001028533. OCLC 51313637.
Desert Storm: Ground War by Hans Halberstadt
Challenger Squadron by Simon Dunstan
Desert Rats:The British 4 and 7 Armoured Brigades, WW2 to Today by Hans Halberstadt
Dinackus, Thomas D. (2000). Order of Battle: Allied Ground Forces of Operation Desert Storm. Central Point, Oregon: Hellgate Press. ISBN 1-55571-493-5.
Burton, James G. The Pentagon Wars: Reformers Challenge the Old Guard, Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 1993. ISBN 1-55750-081-9.
Blitzkrieg in the Gulf: Armor of the 100 Hour war by Yves Debay
Desert Redleg: Artillery Warfare in the First Gulf War by Col. L. Scott Lingamfelter
Bibliography
Arbuthnot, Felicity (17 September 2000). "Allies Deliberately Poisoned Iraq Public Water Supply in Gulf War". Sunday Herald. Scotland. Archived from the original on 5 December 2005. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Atkinson, Rick; Devroy, Ann (12 January 1991). "U.S. Claims Iraqi Nuclear Reactors Hit Hard". The Washington Post. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Austvik, Ole Gunnar (1993). "The War Over the Price of Oil". International Journal of Global Energy Issues.
Bard, Mitchell. "The Gulf War". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 25 May 2009.
Barzilai, Gad (1993).  Klieman, Aharon; Shidlo, Gil (eds.). The Gulf Crisis and Its Global Aftermath. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-08002-6.
Blum, William (1995). Killing Hope: U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II. Common Courage Press. ISBN 978-1-56751-052-2. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Bolkom, Christopher; Pike, Jonathan. "Attack Aircraft Proliferation: Areas for Concern". Archived from the original on 27 December 2005. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Brands, H. W. "George Bush and the Gulf War of 1991." Presidential Studies Quarterly 34.1 (2004): 113 131. online Archived 29 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Brown, Miland. "First Persian Gulf War". Archived from the original on 21 January 2007.
Emering, Edward John (2005). The Decorations and Medals of the Persian Gulf War (1990 to 1991). Claymont, DE: Orders and Medals Society of America. ISBN 978-1-890974-18-3. OCLC 62859116.
Finlan, Alastair (2003). The Gulf War 1991. Osprey. ISBN 978-1-84176-574-7.
Forbes, Daniel (15 May 2000). "Gulf War crimes?". Salon Magazine. Archived from the original on 6 August 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Hawley., T. M. (1992). Against the Fires of Hell: The Environmental Disaster of the Gulf War. New York u.a.: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 978-0-15-103969-2.
Hiro, Dilip (1992). Desert Shield to Desert Storm: The Second Gulf War. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-90657-9.
Clancy, Tom; Horner, Chuck (1999). Every Man a Tiger: The Gulf War Air Campaign. Putnam. ISBN 978-0-399-14493-6.
Hoskinson, Ronald Andrew; Jarvis, Norman (1994). "Gulf War Photo Gallery". Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Kepel, Gilles (2002). "From the Gulf War to the Taliban Jihad / Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam".
Latimer, Jon (2001). Deception in War. London: John Murray. ISBN 978-0-7195-5605-0.
Little, Allan (1 December 1997). "Iraq coming in from the cold?". BBC. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Lowry, Richard S. "The Gulf War Chronicles". iUniverse (2003 and 2008). Archived from the original on 15 April 2008.
MacArthur, John. "Independent Policy Forum Luncheon Honoring". Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Makiya, Kanan (1993). Cruelty and Silence: War, Tyranny, Uprising, and the Arab World. W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-03108-9.
Moise, Edwin. "Bibliography: The First U.S.  Iraq War: Desert Shield and Desert Storm (1990 1991)". Retrieved 21 March 2009.
Munro, Alan (2006). Arab Storm: Politics and Diplomacy Behind the Gulf War. I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84511-128-1.
Naval Historical Center (15 May 1991). "The United States Navy in Desert Shield/Desert Storm". Archived from the original on 2 December 2005. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Wright, Steven (2007). The United States and Persian Gulf Security: The Foundations of the War on Terror. Ithaca Press. ISBN 978-0-86372-321-6.
Niksch, Larry A; Sutter, Robert G (23 May 1991). "Japan's Response to the Persian Gulf Crisis: Implications for U.S.-Japan Relations". Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Odgers, George (1999). 100 Years of Australians at War. Sydney: Lansdowne. ISBN 978-1-86302-669-7.
Riley, Jonathon (2010). Decisive Battles: From Yorktown to Operation Desert Storm. Continuum. p. 207. ISBN 978-1-84725-250-0. SAS first units ground January into iraq.
Roberts, Paul William (1998). The Demonic Comedy: Some Detours in the Baghdad of Saddam Hussein. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-13823-3.
Sifry, Micah; Cerf, Christopher (1991). The Gulf War Reader. New York, NY: Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-1947-9.
Simons, Geoff (2004). Iraq: from Sumer to post-Saddam (3rd ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1770-6.
Smith, Jean Edward (1992). George Bush's War. New York: Henry Holt. ISBN 978-0-8050-1388-7.
Tucker, Spencer (2010). The Encyclopedia of Middle East Wars: The United States in the Persian Gulf, Afghanistan, and Iraq Conflicts. ABC-Clio. ISBN 978-1-84725-250-0.
Turnley, Peter (December 2002). "The Unseen Gulf War (photo essay)". Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Walker, Paul; Stambler, Eric (1991). "... and the dirty little weapons". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Vol. 47, no. 4. Archived from the original on 3 February 2007. Retrieved 30 June 2010.
Victoria, William L. Cleveland, late of Simon Fraser University, Martin Bunton, University of (2013). A History of the Modern Middle East (5th ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. p. 450. ISBN 978-0813348339. Last paragraph: "On 16 January 1991 the air war against Iraq began
Frank, Andre Gunder (20 May 1991). "Third World War in the Gulf: A New World Order". Political Economy Notebooks for Study and Research, No. 14, pp. 5 34. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
Frontline. "The Gulf War: an in-depth examination of the 1990 1991 Persian Gulf crisis". PBS. Retrieved 4 December 2005.
"Report to Congress on the Conduct of the Persian Gulf War, Chapter 6". Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. Retrieved 18 August 2021.
"25 years since the "Locusta" Operation". 25 September 2015.
"Iraq (1990)". Ministero Della Difesa (in Italian).
Films
Dawn of the World (2008)
Bravo Two Zero (1999)
Courage Under Fire (1996)
The Finest Hour (1991)
The Heroes of Desert Storm (1991)
Lessons of Darkness (1992) (a documentary)
Live from Baghdad (2002)
Towelhead (2007)
Three Kings (1999)
The Manchurian Candidate (2004)
Used as a back drop for the film The Big Lebowski (1998). It is frequently discussed as well.
Used in retconned backstory for The Punisher (2004)
Airlift (2016)   A Bollywood film based on the true story of the evacuation of 170,000 Indians stranded in the war zone.
Novels
Braving the Fear  The True Story of Rowdy US Marines in the Gulf War (by Douglas Foster) ISBN 978-1-4137-9902-6
Bravo Two Zero (by Andy McNab) ISBN 0-440-21880-2
The Fist of God (by Frederick Forsyth) ISBN 0-553-09126-3
Glass (Pray the Electrons Back to Sand) (by James Chapman)
Gulf in the War Story: A US Navy Personnel Manager Confides in You (diary from inside the real Top Gun, VF-1 "Wolfpack" by Bob Graham) ISBN 978-1-4751-4705-6
Hogs dime novel series by James Ferro
Jarhead (by Anthony Swofford) ISBN 0-7432-3535-5
Savant (by James Follett)
Summer 1990 (by Firyal AlShalabi)
Third Graders at War (by Felix G)
To Die in Babylon by Harold Livingston
 M60 vs T-62 Cold War Combatants 1956 92 (by Lon Nordeen & David Isby)
External links
Gulf War  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteData from Wikidata
Barbara Walters Interview with General Schwarzkopf, Coalition commander in the Persian Gulf War (Video: ABC, 1991)
Gulf War Discussion from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
Historical Context from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
CBC Digital Archives  The 1991 Gulf War
Master Index of Desert Storm Oral History Interviews Archived 31 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine by the United States Army Center of Military History
Bibliography of the Desert Shield and Desert Storm compiled by the United States Army Center of Military History (via Wayback Machine)
Desert Shield/Desert Storm Photographs Archived 17 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine US Army Heritage and Education Center, Carlisle, Pennsylvania
Persian Gulf War
20th Anniversary of Desert Storm in Photos
Air Force and Air Defense of Iraq before the war (not translated) exact list of the technical details
Liberating Kuwait United States Marine Corps
Friendly-fire Incidents Archived 1 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine  www.gulflink.osd.mil
Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm: Valorous Unit Award Citations by the United States Army Center of Military History
Links to related articles
vteGulf War
Conflict timeline
Disarmament timeline
Participants
Australia
Women
Background
Iran Iraq War
Operation Simoom
Ba'athist Iraq
Petroleum industry in Iraq
Invasion of Kuwait
Battle of Dasman Palace
Battle of the Bridges
Battle of Failaka
U.N. Resolution 660
Coalition intervention
U.N. Resolution 661
Coalition
Iraq United States relations
Carter Doctrine
Military equipment
Battles
Air campaign
Air engagements
"Package Q" air strike
Khafji
Wadi al-Batin
Samurra
Al Busayyah
67 Easting
73 Easting
Phase Line Bullet
Medina Ridge
2nd Kuwait
Highway of Death
Jalibah
Norfolk
Rumaila
Safwan
Impact on Israel
Iraq Israel relations
Iraqi rocket attacks on Israel
Aftermath
Operation Southern Watch
Iraq sanctions
Kuwaiti oil fires
1991 uprisings
Draining of the marshes
Gulf War oil spill
Depleted uranium
Gulf War syndrome
Awards
Operation Provide Comfort
Iraq Kuwait barrier
Memorials
London
Military technology
History of the M1 Abrams
Lion of Babylon (tank)
vteList of modern conflicts in the Middle East1910s
Italo-Turkish War
World War I
Middle Eastern theatre
Arab Revolt
Armenian genocide
Assyrian genocide
Mount Lebanon starvation
Unification of Saudi Arabia
Simko Shikak revolt
1919 Egyptian Revolution
Turkish War of Independence
Greco-Turkish War
Turkish Armenian War
Franco-Turkish War
Revolts
Mahmud Barzanji revolts
1920s
Franco-Syrian War
Iraqi Revolt (1920)
Intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine
Adwan Rebellion
Arab separatism in Khuzestan
Great Syrian Revolt
Sheikh Said rebellion
1930s
Ararat rebellion
Ahmed Barzani revolt
Simele massacre
Saudi Yemeni War (1934)
Goharshad Mosque rebellion
1935 1936 Iraqi Shia revolts
1935 Yazidi revolt
Dersim rebellion
1940s
World War II
Italian bombing of Palestine
Allied invasion of Iraq
Syria Lebanon campaign
Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran
1943 Barzani revolt
Alwaziri coup
Al-Wathbah uprising
Kurdish separatism in Iran
Iran crisis of 1946
Arab Israeli conflict
1948 Arab Israeli War
Suez Crisis
1967 Six-Day War
1973 Yom Kippur War
1982 Lebanon War
1950s
1952 Egyptian Revolution
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Jebel Akhdar War
Cyprus Emergency
Suez Crisis
Yemeni Adenese clan violence
1958 Lebanon crisis
1958 Iraqi revolution
1959 Mosul uprising
1960s
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Dhofar Rebellion
North Yemen Civil War
Feb. 1963 Iraqi coup
Mar. 1963 Syrian coup
Nov. 1963 Iraqi coup
Aden Emergency
1964 Hama riot
Israeli Palestinian conflict
1948 Palestine war
First Intifada
Second Intifada
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
1970s
Black September in Jordan
Yemenite War of 1972
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Shatt al-Arab clashes
Lebanese Civil War
Political violence in Turkey
Islamist uprising in Syria
1977 Shia uprising in Iraq
NDF Rebellion
Yemenite War of 1979
Iranian Revolution
Consolidation of the Iranian Revolution
1979 Qatif Uprising
Grand Mosque seizure
1979 1980 Shia uprising in Iraq
1980s
Iran Iraq War
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Kurdish Turkish conflict
Turkey PKK conflict
South Yemen Civil War
1986 Egyptian conscripts riot
1986 Damascus bombings
Mecca massacre
Abu Nidal's executions
1990s
Gulf War (1990 1991)
1991 Iraqi uprisings
Terror campaign in Egypt (1990s)
Yemeni Civil War (1994)
Iraqi Kurdish Civil War
Islamic insurgency in Saudi Arabia (2000 present)
Operation Desert Fox
al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen
1999 Shia uprising in Iraq
2000s
Iraq War
Balochi insurgency in Iran
2004 Qamishli riots
Houthi insurgency in Yemen
Iran Israel proxy conflict
2006 Lebanon War
Fatah Hamas conflict
South Yemen insurgency
2010s
2011 Bahraini uprising
Egyptian Crisis
Sinai insurgency
Insurgency in Egypt (2013 present)
Syrian civil war
Turkish involvement in Syria
Syrian War spillover in Lebanon
Iraqi insurgency (2011 2013)
War in Iraq (2013 2017)
Islamic State insurgency in Iraq (2017 present)
Yemeni crisis
Yemeni civil war (2014 present)
2020s
2021 Beirut clashes
This list includes World War I and later conflicts (after 1914) of at least 100 fatalities eachProlonged conflicts are listed in the decade when initiated; ongoing conflicts are marked italic, and conflicts with +100,000 killed with bold.
vteArmed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forceslisted chronologicallyDomestic
Shays' Rebellion
Whiskey Rebellion
Fries's Rebellion
Turner's Rebellion
Mormon War
Dorr Rebellion
Bleeding Kansas
Utah War
Harpers Ferry raid
American Civil War
American Indian Wars
Brooks Baxter War
Range War
Hamburg riot
Lincoln County War
Johnson County War
Coal Creek War
Homestead strike
Pullman Strike
Colorado Coalfield War
Red Summer
Battle of Blair Mountain
Tulsa riot
Bonus Army
Puerto Rican revolts
1960s ghetto rebellions
Kent State shootings
1992 Los Angeles riots
2020 racial unrest
2021 U.S. Capitol attack
Foreign
American Revolutionary War
Quasi-War
First Barbary War
War of 1812
Second Barbary War
First Sumatran expedition
Second Sumatran expedition
Ivory Coast expedition
Mexican American War
First Fiji expedition
Second Opium War
Second Fiji expedition
Formosa Expedition
Korean Expedition
Spanish American War
Philippine American War
Boxer Rebellion
Banana Wars
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Korean War
Bay of Pigs Invasion
Vietnam War
Invasion of the Dominican Republic
Invasion of Grenada
Lebanese Civil War
Tanker War
1986 bombing of Libya
Invasion of Panama
Gulf War
1993 missile strikes on Iraq
Somali Civil War
Invasion of Haiti
1996 missile strikes on Iraq
1998 bombing of Iraq
Bosnian War
Kosovo War
Afghanistan War
Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
First Libyan Civil War
War against the Islamic State
Iraq
Syria
Cameroon
Libya
Yemeni civil war
Related
List of conflicts in the U.S.
List of wars involving the U.S.
Timeline of U.S. military operations
Length of U.S. participation in major wars
Overseas expansion
Military history
History of the Central Intelligence Agency
Casualties of war
Peace movement
List of anti-war organizations
Conscientious objector
Cold War
War on terror
vteGeorge H. W. Bush
41st President of the United States (1989 1993)
43rd Vice President of the United States (1981 1989)
Director of Central Intelligence (1976 1977)
U.S. ambassador to the United Nations (1971 1973)
U.S. Representative for TX 7 (1967 1971)
Presidency
Transition
Inauguration
Timeline
1989
1990
1991
1992
January 1993
Environmental policy
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990
Acid Rain Program
Lead and Copper Rule
Soviet Union summits
Malta
Helsinki
Invasion of Panama
Chemical Weapons Accord
Gulf War
Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act
1991 Madrid Conference
FIRRE Act
FDIC Improvement Act
Truth in Savings Act
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992
Housing and Community Development Act of 1992
Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act
National Space Council
New world order
Somali Civil War
Unified Task Force
Negotiations for the North American Free Trade Agreement
Cannabis policy
Vomiting incident
Broccoli comments
White House horseshoe pit
Presidential transition of Bill Clinton
Presidential pardons
International trips
Oval Office desk
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Thomas
Supreme Court candidates
controversies
Executive orders
Presidential proclamations
Life
Presidential Library
Bush School of Government and Public Service
Walker's Point Estate
Post-presidency
Death and state funeral
Speeches
State of the Union addresses
1990
1991
1992
Chicken Kiev
ElectionsU.S. Senate
1964
1970
U.S. House
1966
1968
Vice Presidential
1980 campaign
selection
convention
election
transition
1984 campaign
convention
election
Presidential
1980 campaign
primaries
1988 campaign
primaries
running mate selection
convention
"a thousand points of light"
"Read my lips: no new taxes"
debates
election
1992 campaign
primaries
convention
debates
election
Public image
Saturday Night Live parodies
The X-Presidents
Presidential Reunion (2010 short film)
Supermarket scanner moment
The Naked Gun 2 : The Smell of Fear (1991)
What It Takes: The Way to the White House (1993)
The Silence of the Hams (1994)
Two Bad Neighbors (1996)
George Bush: The Life of a Lone Star Yankee (1997)
The Family: The Real Story of the Bush Dynasty  (2004)
George H.W. Bush (2008)
Bad for Democracy (2008)
Family of Secrets (2009)
41: A Portrait of My Father (2014 book)
Destiny and Power (2015 book)
Books
A World Transformed (1998)
All the Best (1999)
Legacy
Bibliography
Presidential Library
George H. W. Bush Monument
Medal of Freedom
Bush School of Government
Reagan Award
George Bush Intercontinental Airport
George Bush Center for Intelligence
USS George H.W. Bush (CVN-77)
Family
Barbara Bush (wife)
George W. Bush (son
presidency)
Pauline Robinson Bush (daughter)
Jeb Bush (son)
Neil Bush (son)
Marvin Bush (son)
Dorothy Bush Koch (daughter)
Barbara Bush Coyne (granddaughter)
Jenna Bush Hager (granddaughter)
George P. Bush (grandson)
Lauren Bush (granddaughter)
Pierce Bush (grandson)
Prescott Bush (father)
Dorothy Walker Bush (mother)
Nancy Walker Bush Ellis (sister)
Jonathan Bush (brother)
William H. T. Bush (brother)
Samuel P. Bush (grandfather)
George Herbert Walker (grandfather)
James Smith Bush (great-grandfather)
Obadiah Bush (great-great-grandfather)
Millie (family dog)
Sully (service dog)
  Ronald Reagan
Bill Clinton  
  Walter Mondale
Dan Quayle  
 Category
vteSaddam HusseinBiography
17 July Revolution
1979 Ba'ath Party Purge
Iran Iraq War
U.S. support
Anfal campaign
Gulf War
1991 uprisings
Human rights record
Relationship with Al-Qaeda
timeline
Capture
Interrogation
Trial
Execution
Reactions
Books
Zabibah and the King
The Fortified Castle
Men and the City
Begone, Demons
Propaganda
Killing babies
Alleged shredder
Family
Father: Hussein 'Abid al-Majid
Mother: Subha Tulfah al-Mussallat
Half-brothers: Watban, Sabawi, and Barzan
Wives: Sajida Talfah and Samira Shahbandar
Uncle and Father-in-Law: Khairallah Talfah
Sons: Uday and Qusay
Daughters: Rana, Raghad, and Hala
Grandchildren: Mustapha Hussein
Media
Al-ayyam al-tawila
House of Saddam
South Park
The Devil's Double
 Category:Saddam Hussein
vte Iraq topicsHistoryChronology
Ubaid period
Hassuna culture
Halaf culture
Halaf-Ubaid Transitional period
Samarra culture
Uruk period
Jemdet Nasr period
Sumer
Subartu
Akkadian Empire
Gutian dynasty
Neo-Sumerian Empire
Isin-Larsa period
First Babylonian Empire
Old Assyrian Period
Middle Assyrian Empire
Kassite dynasty of the Babylonian Empire
Simurrum culture
Babylonia
Assyria
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Neo-Babylonian Empire
Fall of Babylon
Achaemenid Assyria
Seleucid Babylonia
Parthian Babylonia
Sassanid Asorestan
638 1958
Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia
Umayyad Caliphate
Abbasid Caliphate
Buyid dynasty
Qara Qoyunlu
Aq Qoyunlu
Safavids
Ottoman Iraq (incl. Mamluk dynasty)
Mandate for Mesopotamia
Mandatory Iraq
Kingdom of Iraq
Kings
Arab Federation
Republic
1958 1968
1968 2003
2003 2011
2011 present
Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party   Iraq Region (National Command)
Saddam Hussein
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
1974 1975 Shatt al-Arab clashes
1977 Shia uprising in Iraq
1979 1980 Shia uprising in Iraq
Weapons of mass destruction
Iran Iraq War
Operation Opera
Invasion of Kuwait
Gulf War
1991 uprisings
Sanctions
Iraq War
U.S. invasion
Iraqi insurgency
U.S. troop withdrawal
Insurgency (2011 2013)
War (2014 2017)
Mosul liberation
Insurgency
2019 2021 protests
2021 2022 Iraqi political crisis
Geography
Faw peninsula
Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Borders
Euphrates river
Hamrin Mountains
Lakes
Islands
Mesopotamia
Mesopotamian Marshes
Persian Gulf
Places
Shatt al-Arab
Syrian Desert
Tigris river
Umm Qasr
Zagros Mountains
Wildlife
Sinjar Mountains
Politics
Administrative divisions
Constitution
Council of Representatives (legislative)
Democracy
Elections
Foreign aid
Foreign relations
Government
Council of Ministers
Presidency Council
President
List
Prime Minister
List
Human rights
in pre-Saddam Iraq
in Saddam Hussein's Iraq
in post-invasion Iraq
in ISIL-controlled territory
LGBT
Freedom of religion
Women
Law
Military
Police
Political parties
Judiciary
Wars and conflicts
Economy
Banks
Central Bank
Companies
Corruption
Dinar (currency)
Infrastructure
Foregin Investment
Oil Industry
Oil reserves
Reconstruction
Stock Exchange
Telecommunications
Transportation
Airlines
Railways
Tourism
SocietyDemographics
Iraqis
Languages
Mesopotamian Arabic
Aramaic
Kurdish
Iraqi Turkmen/Turkoman dialects
Persian
Minorities
Armenians
Assyrians
Circassians
Kurds
Mandaeans
Marsh Arabs
Persians
Solluba
Iraqi Turkmen/Turkoman
Jews
Religion
Islam
Christianity
Mandaeism
Yazidis
Irreligion
General
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Literature
Education
Health
Media
Television
Music
Smoking
Sports
Squatting
Public holidays
Mesopotamian spring festival (Akitu)
Mandaean New Year
 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
 Commons
vteHistory of the United StatesTimeline
Geological history
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
Reagan Era
1991 2008
2008 present
Topics
Abortion
Agriculture
American Century
African Americans
Capital punishment
Cities
Corruption
The Constitution
Demography
Economy
Banking
Education
Higher education
Flag
Foreign policy
Diplomacy
Immigration
Labor
Law enforcement
LGBT
Lumber
Medicine
Merchant Marine
Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
Music
Native Americans
Postal service
Railway
Religion
Slavery
Sexual slavery
Sports
Taxation
Technology and industry
Territorial evolution
Historic regions
American frontier
Manifest destiny
Indian removal
Voting rights
Women
By region
New England
The South
The West
The West Coast
 Category
 Portal
vteCold War
USA
USSR
NATO
Warsaw Pact
ANZUS
SEATO
METO
Rio Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
1940s
Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Jamaican political conflict
Dekemvriana
Soviet stance in the Warsaw Uprising
Percentages agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states
Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Downfall
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Indonesian National Revolution
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
1947 Polish legislative election
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 crises
Partition of India
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 1948
1947 1949 Palestine war
1947 1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab Israeli War
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
Marshall Plan
Comecon
1948 Czechoslovak coup d' tat
Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council
Al-Wathbah uprising
Tito Stalin split
Berlin Blockade
Annexation of Hyderabad
Madiun Affair
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Malayan Emergency
March 1949 Syrian coup d' tat
Operation Valuable
1950s
Bamboo Curtain
McCarthyism
Korean War
Arab Cold War (1952 1979)
Egyptian revolution of 1952
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Mau Mau rebellion
East German uprising of 1953
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Pact of Madrid
Bricker Amendment
1954 Syrian coup d' tat
Petrov Affair
Domino theory
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d' tat
Capture of the Tuapse
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Jebel Akhdar War
Algerian War
Kashmir Princess
Bandung Conference
Geneva Summit (1955)
Vietnam War
Cyprus Emergency
"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"
1956 Pozna  protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Polish October
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Sputnik crisis
Ifni War
Iraqi 14 July Revolution
1958 Lebanon crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
Laotian Civil War
Kitchen Debate
Cuban Revolution
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
1960s
Congo Crisis
Simba rebellion
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d' tat
Albanian Soviet split
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Annexation of Goa
Papua conflict
Indonesia Malaysia confrontation
Sand War
Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence
Cuban Missile Crisis
El Porte azo
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Ramadan Revolution
Eritrean War of Independence
North Yemen Civil War
1963 Syrian coup d' tat
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Aden Emergency
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Shifta War
Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre
Guatemalan Civil War
Colombian conflict
1964 Brazilian coup d' tat
Dominican Civil War
Rhodesian Bush War
Indonesian mass killings of 1965 1966
Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)
ASEAN Declaration
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
Cultural Revolution
Argentine Revolution
South African Border War
Korean DMZ Conflict
12-3 incident
Greek junta
1967 Hong Kong riots
Years of Lead (Italy)
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Al-Wadiah War
Nigerian Civil War
Protests of 1968
May 68
Prague Spring
USS Pueblo incident
1968 Polish political crisis
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
17 July Revolution
1968 Peruvian coup d' tat
Revolutionary Government
1969 Sudanese coup d' tat
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
1970s
D tente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September
Alcora Exercise
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Western Sahara conflict
Cambodian Civil War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1970 Polish protests
Koza riot
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 JVP insurrection
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1971 Sudanese coup d' tat
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972
Yemenite War of 1972
Munich massacre
1972 1975 Bangladesh insurgency
Eritrean Civil Wars
1973 Uruguayan coup d' tat
1973 Afghan coup d' tat
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
1973 oil crisis
Carnation Revolution
Spanish transition to democracy
Metapolitefsi
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Angolan Civil War
Cambodian genocide
June 1976 protests
Mozambican Civil War
Oromo conflict
Ogaden War
1978 Somali coup d' tat attempt
Western Sahara War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Third Indochina War
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Operation Condor
Dirty War (Argentina)
1976 Argentine coup d' tat
Egyptian Libyan War
German Autumn
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Nicaraguan Revolution
Uganda Tanzania War
NDF Rebellion
Chadian Libyan War
Yemenite War of 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
Sino-Vietnamese War
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
1980s
Salvadoran Civil War
Soviet Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
Gera Demands
Peruvian Revolution
Gda sk Agreement
Solidarity
Eritrean Civil Wars
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Ugandan Bush War
Gulf of Sidra incident
Martial law in Poland
Casamance conflict
Falklands War
1982 Ethiopian Somali Border War
Ndogboyosoi War
United States invasion of Grenada
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
1985 Geneva Summit
Iran Iraq War
Somali Rebellion
Reykjav k Summit
1986 Black Sea incident
South Yemen Civil War
Toyota War
1987 Lieyu massacre
Operation INFEKTION
1987 1989 JVP insurrection
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
8888 Uprising
Solidarity (Soviet reaction)
Contras
Central American crisis
Operation RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Bougainville conflict
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
Afghan Civil War
United States invasion of Panama
1988 Polish strikes
Polish Round Table Agreement
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Peaceful Revolution
1990s
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Gulf War
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup
Frozen conflicts
Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Kinmen Agreement
IdeologiesCapitalism
Liberalism
Chicago school
Keynesianism
Libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Democratic capitalism
Socialism
Communism
Marxism Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Maoism
Trotskyism
Stalinism
Titoism
Other
Imperialism
Anti-imperialism
Nationalism
Ultranationalism
Chauvinism
Ethnic nationalism
Racism
Zionism
Anti-Zionism
Fascism
Neo-Nazism
Islamism
Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Guided democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy
White nationalism
White separatism
Apartheid
Organizations
NATO
SEATO
METO
EEC
Warsaw Pact
Comecon
Non-Aligned Movement
NN States
ASEAN
SAARC
Safari Club
PropagandaPro-communist
Active measures
Izvestia
Neues Deutschland
Pravda
Rud  pr vo
Trybuna Ludu
TASS
Soviet Life
Pro-Western
Amerika
Crusade for Freedom
Paix et Libert 
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Radio Free Asia
Red Scare
Voice of America
Technologicalcompetition
Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Historians
Gar Alperovitz
Thomas A. Bailey
Michael Beschloss
Archie Brown
Warren H. Carroll
Adrian Cioroianu
John Costello
Michael Cox
Nicholas J. Cull
Norman Davies
Willem Drees
Robert D. English
Herbert Feis
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Andr  Fontaine
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
John Lewis Gaddis
Lloyd Gardner
Timothy Garton Ash
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Fred Halliday
Jussi Hanhim ki
John Earl Haynes
Patrick J. Hearden
Tvrtko Jakovina
Tony Judt
Harvey Klehr
Gabriel Kolko
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Melvyn P. Leffler
Geir Lundestad
Vojtech Mastny
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Thomas J. McCormick
Timothy Naftali
Marius Oprea
David S. Painter
William B. Pickett
Ronald E. Powaski
Yakov M. Rabkin
Mary Elise Sarotte
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Ellen Schrecker
Giles Scott-Smith
Shen Zhihua
Timothy D. Snyder
Athan Theoharis
Andrew Thorpe
Vladimir Tism neanu
Patrick Vaughan
Alex von Tunzelmann
Odd Arne Westad
William Appleman Williams
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Rudolph Winnacker
Ken Young
Espionage andintelligence
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
Soviet espionage in the United States
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CIA
MI5
MI6
United States involvement in regime change
Soviet involvement in regime change
MVD
KGB
Stasi
See also
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet Union United States relations
Soviet Union United States summits
Russia NATO relations
War on terror
Brinkmanship
Second Cold War
Russian Revolution
Category
List of conflicts
Timeline
vteGulf Cooperation CouncilMember states
Bahrain
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Economy
Dolphin Gas Project
GCC Patent Office
GCC Standardization Organization
Gulf and Arabian Peninsula Unity Forum
Gulf Conformity mark
Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting
Gulf Railway
Khaleeji currency
Bilateral free-trade agreements
Migrant workers in the GCC
kafala system
homosexuality test
Workforce nationalization
Geopolitical history
Gulf War
Iran Saudi Arabia proxy conflict
2011 Bahraini uprising
Saudi-led intervention in Bahrain
Qatar Saudi Arabia diplomatic conflict
Qatar diplomatic crisis
Yemeni Civil War
Saudi-led intervention
Peninsula Shield Force
Exercise North Thunder
Arab Israeli alliance against Iran
Sport
Arabian Gulf Cup
Arabian Gulf Futsal Cup
Arabian Gulf rugby team
GCC Champions League
GCC Games
2011 Games
GCC Athletics Championships
Gulf Ice Hockey Championship
GCC U-17 Championship
GCC U-19 Championship
GCC U-23 Championship
GCC Volleyball Club Championship
GCC Youth Athletics Championships
 Category:Gulf Cooperation Council
Portals: Iraq Kuwait United States 1990s
Authority control National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_War&oldid=1148345433"