Task manager application included with the Windows NT family of operating systems
Task ManagerTask Manager in Windows 11 2022 UpdateOriginal author(s)David Plummer[1]Developer(s)MicrosoftInitial releaseAugust 24, 1996; 26 years ago (1996-08-24)Written inC++Operating systemWindows NT 4.0 and onwardsPlatformIA-32, x86-64, ARM and Itanium (and historically DEC Alpha, MIPS, and PowerPC)PredecessorSystem MonitorTypeTask manager, system monitor and startup manager
Task Manager, previously known as Windows Task Manager, is a task manager, system monitor, and startup manager included with Microsoft Windows systems.  It provides information about computer performance and running software, including name of running processes, CPU and GPU load, commit charge, I/O details, logged-in users, and Windows services.  Task Manager can also be used to set process priorities, processor affinity, start and stop services, and forcibly terminate processes.
The program can be started in recent versions of Windows by pressing   Win+R and then typing in taskmgr.exe, by pressing Ctrl+Alt+Delete and clicking Start Task Manager, by pressing Ctrl+  Shift+Esc, by using Windows Search in the Start Menu and typing taskmgr, by right-clicking on the Windows taskbar and selecting "Task Manager", by typing taskmgr in the File Explorer address bar, or by typing taskmgr in Command Prompt or Windows PowerShell.
Task Manager was introduced in its current form with Windows NT 4.0.  Prior versions of Windows NT, as well as Windows 3.x, include the Task List application, are capable of listing currently running processes and killing them, or creating new processes. Windows 9x has a program known as Close Program which lists the programs currently running and offers options to close programs as well shut down the computer.[2]
Functionality[edit]
 Task Manager on Windows XP, showing the Processes tab
Since Windows 8, Task Manager has two views. The first time Task Manager is invoked by a user, it shows in a simplified summary mode (described in the user experience as Fewer Details). It can be switched to a more detailed mode by clicking More Details. This setting is remembered for that user on that machine.[3]
Since at least Windows 2000, the CPU usage can be displayed as a tray icon in the task bar for quick glance.[4][5]
Summary mode[edit]
In summary mode, Task Manager shows a list of currently running programs that have a main window.  It has a "more details" hyperlink that activates a full-fledged Task Manager with several tabs.
Right-clicking any of the applications in the list allows switching to that application or ending the application's task. Issuing an end task causes a request for graceful exit to be sent to the application.
Processes and details[edit]
The Processes tab shows a list of all running processes on the system. This list includes Windows Services and processes from other accounts. The Delete key can also be used to terminate processes on the Processes tab. By default, the processes tab shows the user account the process is running under, the amount of CPU, and the amount of memory the process is currently consuming. There are more columns that can be shown. The Processes tab divides the process into three categories:
Apps: Programs with a main window
Windows processes: Components of Windows itself that do not have a main window, including services
Background process: Programs that do not have a main window, including services, and are not part of the Windows itself
This tab shows the name of every main window and every service associated with each process. Both a graceful exit command and a termination command can be sent from this tab, depending on whether the command is sent to the process or its window.
The Details tab is a more basic version of the Processes tab, and acts similar to the Processes tab in Windows 7 and earlier. It has a more rudimentary user experience and can perform some additional actions. Right-clicking a process in the list allows changing the priority the process has, setting processor affinity (setting which CPU(s) the process can execute on), and allows the process to be ended. Choosing to End Process causes Windows to immediately kill the process. Choosing to "End Process Tree" causes Windows to immediately kill the process, as well as all processes directly or indirectly started by that process. Unlike choosing End Task from the Applications tab, when choosing to End Process the program is not given a warning nor a chance to clean up before ending. However, when a process that is running under a security context different from the one which issued the call to Terminate Process, the use of the KILL command-line utility is required.[6]
Performance[edit]
The Performance tab shows overall statistics about the system's performance, most notably the overall amount of CPU usage and how much memory is being used. A chart of recent usage for both of these values is shown. Details about specific areas of memory are also shown.
There is an option to break the CPU usage graph into two sections: kernel mode time and user mode time. Many device drivers, and core parts of the operating system run in kernel mode, whereas user applications run in user mode. This option can be turned on by choosing Show kernel times from the View menu. When this option is turned on the CPU usage graph will show a green and a red area. The red area is the amount of time spent in kernel mode, and the green area shows the amount of time spent in user mode.
The Performance tab also shows statistics relating to each of the network adapters present in the computer. By default, the adapter name, percentage of network utilization, link speed, and state of the network adapter are shown, along with a chart of recent activity.
App history[edit]
The App history tab shows resource usage information about Universal Windows Platform apps. Windows controls the life cycle of these apps more tightly. This tab is where the data that Windows has collected about them, and then be viewed at a later time.
Startup[edit]
The Startup tab manages software that starts with Windows shell.
Users[edit]
The Users tab shows all users that currently have a session on the computer. On server computers, there may be several users connected to the computer using Terminal Services (or the Fast User Switching service, on Windows XP). Users can be disconnected or logged off from this tab.
History[edit]
Task Manager was originally an external side project developed at home by Microsoft developer David Plummer; encouraged by Dave Cutler and coworkers to make it part of the main product "build", he donated the project in 1995.  The original task manager design featured a different Processes page with information being taken from the public Registry APIs rather than the private internal operating system metrics.
Windows 9x[edit]
A Close Program dialog box comes up when Ctrl+Alt+Delete is pressed in Windows 9x.[2] Also, in Windows 9x, there is a program called Tasks (TASKMAN.EXE) located in the Windows directory. It is rudimentary and has fewer features. The System Monitor utility in Windows 9x contains process and network monitoring functionality similar to that of the Windows Task Manager. Also, the Tasks program is called by clicking twice on the desktop if Explorer process is down.
Windows XP[edit]
In Windows XP only, there is a "Shut Down" menu that provides access to Standby, Hibernate, Turn off, Restart, Log Off, and Switch User. This is because, by default in Windows XP, pressing Ctrl+Alt+Delete  opens the Task Manager instead of opening a dialog that provides access to the Task Manager in addition to the options mentioned above.
On the Performance tab, the display of the CPU values was changed from a display mimicking a LED seven-segment display, to a standard numeric value. This was done to accommodate non-Arabic numeral systems, such as Eastern Arabic numerals, which cannot be represented using a seven-segment display.[7]
Prior to Windows XP, process names longer than 15 characters in length are truncated. This problem is resolved in Windows XP.[8]
The users tab is introduced by Windows XP.
Beginning with Windows XP, the Delete key is enabled on the Processes tab.
Windows Vista[edit]
Windows Task Manager has been updated in Windows Vista with new features,[9] including:
A "Services" tab to view and modify currently running Windows services and start and stop any service as well as enable/disable the User Account Control (UAC) file and registry virtualization of a process.
New "Image Path Name" and "Command Line", and "Description" columns in the Processes tab. These show the full name and path of the executable image running in a process, any command-line parameters that were provided, and the image file's "Description" property.
New columns showing DEP and virtualization statuses. Virtualization status refers to UAC virtualization, under which file and registry references to certain system locations will be silently redirected to user-specific areas.
By right-clicking on any process, it is possible to directly open the Properties of the process's executable image file or of the directory (folder) containing the process.
The Task Manager has also been made less vulnerable to attack from remote sources or viruses as it must be operating under administrative rights to carry out certain tasks, such as logging off other connected users or sending messages. The user must go into the "Processes" tab and click "Show processes from other users" in order to verify administrative rights and unlock these privileges. Showing processes from all users requires all users including administrators to accept a UAC prompt, unless UAC is disabled. If the user is not an administrator, they must enter a password for an administrator account when prompted to proceed, unless UAC is disabled, in which case the elevation does not occur.
By right-clicking on any running process, it is possible to create a dump. This feature can be useful if an application or a process is not responding, so that the dump file can be opened in a debugger to get more information.
The "Shut Down" menu containing Standby, Hibernate, Turn off, Restart, Log Off and Switch User has been removed. This was done due to low usage, and to reduce the overall complexity of Task Manager.[10]
The Performance tab shows the system uptime.
Windows 8[edit]
In Windows 8, Windows Task Manager has been overhauled and the following changes[3] were made:
Starting in Windows 8, the tabs are hidden by default and Task Manager opens in summary mode (Fewer details). This view only shows applications and their associated processes. Prior to Windows 8, what is shown in the summary mode was shown in the tab named "Applications".
Resource utilization in the Processes tab is shown with various shades of yellow, with darker color representing heavier use.
The Performance tab is split into CPU, memory, disk, ethernet, and wireless network (if applicable) sections. There are overall graphs for each, and clicking on one reaches details for that particular resource. This includes consolidating information that previously appeared in the Networking tab from Windows XP through Windows 7.
The CPU tab no longer displays individual graphs for every logical processor on the system by default. It now can show data for each NUMA node.
The CPU tab now displays simple percentages on heat-mapping tiles to display utilization for systems with many (64 up to 640) logical processors.[11] The color used for these heat maps is blue, with darker color again indicating heavier utilization.
Hovering the cursor over any logical processor's data now shows the NUMA node of that processor and its ID.
A new Startup tab has been added that lists running startup applications.[12] Previously, MSConfig was in charge of this task, or in Windows Vista only, the "Software Explorer" section of Windows Defender.[13]  The Windows Defender that shipped built-into Windows 7 lacked this option, and it was also not present in the downloadable Microsoft Security Essentials either.
The Processes tab now lists application names, application status, and overall usage data for CPU, memory, hard disk, and network resources for each process.
A new App History tab is introduced.
The application status can be changed to suspended.
The normal process information found in the older Task Manager can be found in the new Details tab.
Windows 10[edit]
The Processes tab is divided into categories.[14]
Display GPU information in the Performance tab, if available.
Weakness[edit]
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Task Manager" Windows news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (May 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Task Manager is a common target of computer viruses and other forms of malware; typically malware will close the Task Manager as soon as it is started, so as to hide itself from users. Some malware will also disable task manager as an administrator. Variants of the Zotob and Spybot worms have used this technique, for example.[15][obsolete source] Using Group Policy, it is possible to disable the Task Manager. Many types of malware also enable this policy setting in the registry. Rootkits can prevent themselves from getting listed in the Task Manager, thereby preventing their detection and termination using it.
See also[edit]
Resource Monitor
Process Explorer
Taskkill
Tasklist
Windows Task Scheduler
References[edit]
^ Windows 10: The developer who wrote Windows Task Manager reveals its secrets | ZDNet
^ a b "How to end task on the items that are running in the background". Nuance Communications. June 22, 2002.
^ a b "Windows 8 Task Manager In-Depth". Microsoft Corporation. June 6, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2019.
^ Hoffman, Chris (August 19, 2020). "How to Keep the Task Manager's CPU Stats In Your System Tray". How-To Geek. Retrieved January 25, 2022.
^ Bailey, Carol (November 16, 2001). "Get IT Done: Start your troubleshooting with the Windows 2000 Task Manager". TechRepublic. Retrieved January 25, 2022.
^ "Cannot End Service Processes with Task Manager". Support. Microsoft. February 27, 2007. Archived from the original on March 8, 2007. Retrieved December 6, 2012.
^ Raymond Chen (July 25, 2007). "What is Dave's frame class?".
^ Magic 15 with GetProcessesByName on Windows 2000[dead link]
^ Brien Posey (May 2008). "Microsoft's Windows Task Manager: What's new in Vista?". Retrieved February 4, 2019.
^ Raymond Chen (June 19, 2014). "What happened to the Shut Down menu in classic Task Manager?".
^ Sinofsky, Steven (October 27, 2011). "Using Task Manager with 64+ logical processors". Building Windows 8. Microsoft. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Retrieved October 29, 2011.
^ Serban, Alex (October 24, 2011). "How to Get the Most out of New Windows 8 Task Manager?". ITProPortal. Future Publishing.
^ "Manage startup programs in Vista using Windows Defender's Software Explorer". August 9, 2007.
^ Corden, Jez (September 4, 2015). "How to use Task Manager to optimize your Windows 10 experience". Windows Central. Retrieved February 4, 2019.
^ "Task Manager, MSCONFIG, or REGEDIT disappears while opening". Ramesh's website. December 19, 2005. Archived from the original on December 6, 2010. Retrieved September 17, 2007.
External links[edit]
How to use and troubleshoot issues with Windows Task Manager, Microsoft Help and Support
Windows 8 Task Manager In-Depth Archived April 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, Gavin Gear, Blogging Windows
vteMicrosoft Windows components
APIs
Architecture
9x
NT
Booting process
9x
NT
Games
Managementtools
App Installer
Command Prompt
Control Panel
Device Manager
Disk Cleanup
Drive Optimizer
Driver Verifier
DirectX Diagnostic Tool
Event Viewer
IExpress
Management Console
Netsh
Performance Monitor
Recovery Console
Resource Monitor
Settings
Sysprep
System Configuration
System File Checker
System Information
System Policy Editor
System Restore
Task Manager
Windows Error Reporting
Windows Ink
Windows Installer
PowerShell
Windows Update
Windows Insider
WinRE
WMI
Apps
3D Viewer
Clock
Calculator
Calendar
Camera
Character Map
Clipchamp
Cortana
Edge
Fax and Scan
Feedback Hub
Get Help
Magnifier
Mail
Maps
Messaging
Media Player
Windows 11
Movies & TV
Mobility Center
Money
Narrator
Notepad
OneDrive
OneNote
Paint
Paint 3D
People
Phone Link
Photos
Quick Assist
Snipping Tool
Speech Recognition
Skype
Sports
Start
Sticky Notes
Store
Tips
Voice Recorder
Weather
WordPad
Xbox
Shell
Action Center
Aero
AutoPlay
AutoRun
ClearType
Explorer
Search
Indexing Service
IFilter
Saved search
Namespace
Special folder
Start menu
Taskbar
Task View
Windows spotlight
Windows XP visual styles
Services
Service Control Manager
BITS
CLFS
Multimedia Class Scheduler
Shadow Copy
Task Scheduler
Error Reporting
Wireless Zero Configuration
File systems
CDFS
DFS
exFAT
IFS
FAT
NTFS
Hard link
links
Mount Point
Reparse point
TxF
EFS
ReFS
UDF
Server
Active Directory
Domains
DNS
Group Policy
Roaming user profiles
Folder redirection
Distributed Transaction Coordinator
MSMQ
Windows Media Services
Active DRM Services
IIS
WSUS
SharePoint
Network Access Protection
PWS
DFS Replication
Print Services for UNIX
Remote Desktop Services
Remote Differential Compression
Remote Installation Services
Windows Deployment Services
System Resource Manager
Hyper-V
Server Core
Architecture
Boot Manager
Console
CSRSS
Desktop Window Manager
Portable Executable
EXE
DLL
Enhanced Write Filter
Graphics Device Interface
Hardware Abstraction Layer
I/O request packet
Imaging Format
Kernel Transaction Manager
Library files
Logical Disk Manager
LSASS
MinWin
NTLDR
Ntoskrnl.exe
Object Manager
Open XML Paper Specification
Registry
Resource Protection
Security Account Manager
Server Message Block
Shadow Copy
SMSS
System Idle Process
USER
WHEA
Winlogon
WinUSB
Security
Security and Maintenance
AppLocker
BitLocker
Credential Guard
Data Execution Prevention
Defender
Family features
Kernel Patch Protection
Mandatory Integrity Control
Protected Media Path
User Account Control
User Interface Privilege Isolation
Windows Firewall
Compatibility
COMMAND.COM
Windows Subsystem for Linux
WoW64
API
Active Scripting
WSH
VBScript
JScript
COM
ActiveX
ActiveX Document
COM Structured storage
DCOM
OLE
OLE Automation
Transaction Server
DirectX
Native
.NET
Universal Windows Platform
WinAPI
Windows Mixed Reality
Windows Runtime
WinUSB
Games
Solitaire Collection
Surf
DiscontinuedGames
3D Pinball
Chess Titans
FreeCell
Hearts
InkBall
Hold 'Em
Purble Place
Spider Solitaire
Solitaire
Tinker
Apps
ActiveMovie
Anytime Upgrade
Address Book
Backup and Restore
Cardfile
CardSpace
CD Player
Chat
Contacts
Desktop Gadgets
Diagnostics
DriveSpace
DVD Maker
Easy Transfer
Fax
Food & Drink
Groove Music
Help and Support Center
Health & Fitness
HyperTerminal
Imaging
Internet Explorer
Journal
Media Center
Meeting Space
Messaging
Messenger
Mobile Device Center
Movie Maker
MSN Dial-up
NetMeeting
NTBackup
Outlook Express
Pay
Phone Companion
Photo Gallery
Photo Viewer
Program Manager
Steps Recorder
Syskey
Travel
WinHelp
Write
Others
ScanDisk
File Protection
Media Control Interface
MS-DOS 7
Next-Generation Secure Computing Base
POSIX subsystem
HPFS
Interix
Video for Windows
Virtual DOS machine
Windows on Windows
Windows SideShow
Windows Services for UNIX
Windows System Assessment Tool
Windows To Go
WinFS
Spun off toMicrosoft Store
DVD Player
File Manager
Hover!
Mahjong
Minesweeper
 Category
 List
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Task_Manager_(Windows)&oldid=1147346894"