National flag
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Flag of Mexico" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (January 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
United Mexican StatesUseNational flag and ensign    Proportion4:7Adopted16 September 1968; 54 years ago (1968-09-16)DesignA vertical tricolor of green, white and red, with the National Coat of Arms centered on the white band.Designed byAgustin de Iturbide (Original version)Francisco Eppens Helguera
UseNaval jack  Proportion1:1DesignA diagonal tricolor of white, green, red, with a thin anchor in the center. Three eight-pointed gold stars are in the canton, and the bottom two corners.
The national flag of Mexico (Spanish: Bandera de M xico) is a vertical tricolor of  green, white, and red with the national coat of arms charged in the center of the white stripe. While the meaning of the colors has changed over time, these three colors were adopted by Mexico following independence from Spain during the country's War of Independence, and subsequent First Mexican Empire.
Red, white, and green are the colors of the national army in Mexico. The central emblem is the Mexican coat of arms, based on the Aztec symbol for Tenochtitlan (now Mexico City), the center of the Aztec Empire. It recalls the legend of an eagle sitting on a  cactus while devouring a serpent that signaled to the Aztecs where to found their city, Tenochtitlan.[1]
History[edit]
See also: List of Mexican flags
  The Twin Flags of Allende, a pair of flags that were made expressly by the then captain of the Army of New Spain Ignacio Allende for the armed struggle that would begin on October 1, 1810, but since the date of the armed uprising was brought forward due to the discovery of the conspiracy, the flags had to be used without further preparation
 Flag display at the Mexican History Museum of Monterrey, Nuevo Le n
Before the adoption of the first national flag, various flags were used during the War of Independence from Spain. Though it was never adopted as an official flag, many historians consider the first Mexican flag to be the Standard of the Virgin of Guadalupe, which was carried by Miguel Hidalgo after the Grito de Dolores on September 16, 1810.[2] The Standard became the initial symbol of the rebel army during the Mexican War of Independence. Various other Standards were used during the war. Jos  Mar a Morelos used a flag with an image of the Virgin to which was added a blue and white insignia with a crowned eagle on a cactus over a three-arched bridge and the letters V.V.M. (Viva la Virgen Mar a  "long live the Virgin Mary").[2] The Revolutionary Army also used a flag featuring the colors white, blue and red in vertical stripes. The first use of the modern colors green, white and red was in the flag of the unified Army of the Three Guarantees (pictured above) after independence from Spain was won.[3][dubious    discuss]
While similar to the national flag that is used today, the eagle in these arms is not holding a serpent in his talons and a crown has been affixed to the head of the eagle to signify the Empire. Variants of this flag that appeared in this period also included a naval flag that had the tricolor pattern.But only contained the eagle with the crown above its head. The military also used a similar square flag, but the eagle was larger than on the national flag. The national flag was officially decreed by Agust n de Iturbide in November 1821 and first officially used in July 1822. This flag was no longer used upon the abolishment of the empire.[4]
The first national flag was established in 1821, the first year of Mexican recognized sovereignty. The imperial government that was set up chose a tricolor flag of green, white and red and charged with the national coat of arms. The official decree stated that Sole article:... the national flag and flags of the army shall be tricolor, adopting forever the colors green, white and "encarnado" [flesh-colored red] arranged vertically, with the crowned eagle in the center of the white stripe, according to the following design[5]
 Mexican flags of different sizes.
 Flag of Mexico flying on outdoor flagpole.
The second national flag was adopted after the establishment of the first federal republic in 1823. The new flag was chosen for the republic in April of that year, the only difference being the appearance of the central emblem. The crown was removed from the eagle's head and a serpent was placed in the eagle's right talon. Another addition to the flag is a branch of oak and laurel branches, a tradition that was carried over to the current flag. This flag was discontinued in 1864 upon the dissolution of the first federal republic.[6]
The third national flag was that of the Second Mexican Empire. Once again, the national flag used the green, white and red tricolor pattern with the white stripe being charged with the national arms. However, the ratio of the flag was changed from 4:7 to 1:2 and four eagles, which had crowns above their heads, were placed at each corner of the flag. The design, which was ordered by the Emperor Maximilian, gave the arms a look similar to the French Imperial arms, but he decided to add a bit of "Mexican flavor" to the flag. The coat of arms was described in a decree issued in November 1865 as: oval in shape in blue; in the center is depicted the eagle of Anahuac, in profile and passant, supported by a cactus, supported, in turn, by a rock sunk on water, and ripping a snake. The border is gold charged by a garland of encino and laurel. The crest is the Imperial Crown. As supporters, two griffins from our elders' arms, their upper half in black and the lower in gold; behind the scepter and sword in saltire. The shield is surrounded by the collar of the Order of the  guila Mexicana, and the motto: "Equidad en la Justicia" [Equity in Justice][7]
  Reverse side of the flag
The current national flag was adopted on September 16, 1968, and was confirmed by law on February 24, 1984. The current version is an adaptation of the design approved by presidential decree in 1916 by Venustiano Carranza, where the eagle was changed from a front-facing to a side-facing position.[3] Before the adoption of the current national flag, official flags have been used by the government. All of these flags used the tricolor pattern, with the only differences being the changes in the coat of arms, which was still charged in the center of the white stripe. One possible reason for the 1968 flag and arms change was that Mexico City was the host of the 1968 Summer Olympic Games.[8] Around this same time period, the plain tricolor flag that Mexico used as its merchant ensign was also legally abandoned. The reasoning is that without the coat of arms, the flag would not be the Mexican flag; it would become nearly identical to the Italian flag.[9]
There was also debate in 1984 about how the coat of arms would be depicted on the reverse of the flag. To solve this problem, a PAN deputy proposed a change to the Law of the National Arms, Flag and Anthem that same year to allow for the eagle to face to the right when the reverse of the flag is displayed.[10] In 1995, the law was changed to include the following:
When the National Arms is reproduced on the reverse side of the National Flag, the Mexican Eagle will appear standing on its right talon, holding with the left one and the beak the curved serpent.[11]
Design and symbolism[edit]
 Official construction sheet
 The Mexican coat of arms
Main article: Coat of arms of Mexico
The official design of the Mexican flag can be found in Article 3 of the Law on the National Arms, Flag, and Anthem, passed in 1984. While the exact shades of the flag have not been defined by law, in 2001 it was reported, through personal communication, to Flags of the World that the Interior Ministry (Secretar a de Gobernaci n) has suggested the following tones in the Pantone system;[12] nevertheless, the ministry has not officially ruled on the matter. So far, there are no official printed documents or statements on the color shades. The Pantone colors listed below were employed by the London Organising Committee of the Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Limited in its "Flag Manual".[13] while 2008 Beijing Olympic Games Flag Manual proposed others.[14]
Colour scheme
Green
White
Red
Pantone[15]
3425c
Safe
186c
RGB[16]
0-104-71
255-255-255
206-17-37
CMYK[17]
100-34-93-30
0-0-0-0
0-92-82-19
Web colors[18]
006847
FFFFFF
CE1125
The article dictates what must be featured on the flag and also its proportions. Copies of the national flag which are made according to this law are kept in two locations: the General National Archive (Archivo General de la Naci n) and the National Museum of History (Museo Nacional de Historia). Art. 3: The Bandera Nacional is a rectangle divided into three vertical stripes of identical measures, with the colors placed in the following order from hoist to fly: green, white, and red. Centered in the white stripe, the National Coat of Arms has a diameter of three-fourths the width of the white stripe. The proportion of the flag is four to seven (Ratio 4:7). It could carry a rope or tie of the same colors below the truck.
Differences with Italian flag[edit]
 Comparison of the Mexican and Italian flags.
The Mexican tricolor (green, white, red) has been continuously used for a longer time than the Italian one. At the time of the Mexican flag's adoption, the similarly toned Italian tricolor had already been used briefly in Europe,[19] for example by the Cisalpine Republic in 1797, but it had different proportions from the modern Italian flag.[20]
Due to the common arrangement of the colors, at first sight, it seems that the only difference between the Italian and the Mexican flag is only the coat of arms of Mexico present in the latter. Both flags use the same colors (green, white, and red), but the Mexican flag has darker shades of green and red (particularly green). Additionally, these flags present a different aspect ratio (proportions): the Italian flag aspect ratio is 2:3 (1 to 1.5), more squarish in shape, while the Mexican flag aspect ratio is 4:7 (1 to 1.75), a longer shape.[21]
The similarity between the two flags posed a serious problem in maritime transport, given that originally the Mexican mercantile flag was devoid of arms and therefore was consequently identical to the Italian Republican tricolor of 1946; to obviate the inconvenience, at the request of the International Maritime Organization, both Italy and Mexico adopted naval flags with different crests.[22]
Protocol[edit]
 The civil salute given by former Mexican President Vicente Fox
When the flag is paraded in front of a crowd, those in military uniform must present a salute according to military regulations. Civilians who are present give the following salute to the national flag: standing at attention (firms), they raise their right arms and place their right hands on their chests, in front of the heart. The hand is flat and the palm of the hand is facing the ground. This salute is known as the El saludo civil a la Bandera Nacional ("The Civil Salute to the National Flag"). When the President is acting in the capacity of the Head of the Armed Forces, he salutes the national flag with a military salute. When the national anthem is played on television to open or close daily programming, the national flag will be shown at the same time.[23] During certain times of the year, the flag is flown by both civilians and government personnel. Mostly, these events coincide with national holidays and days of significance to the country. During some of these occasions, the flag will be flown at half-mast to honor the death of important Mexicans. These dates are listed in Article 18 of the Law of the National Flag, Arms, and Anthem. The national  D a de la Bandera (Flag Day) celebration occurs on February 24. On this day in 1821, all the factions fighting in the War of Independence joined to form the Army of the Three Guarantees in response to the Plan de Iguala, which was signed by Vicente Guerrero and Agust n de Iturbide, declaring Mexico officially an independent country. General Vicente Guerrero was the first military official who swore allegiance to the national flag.[3] Another flag tradition is that before every Olympics in which Mexico is a participant, the President hands a flag over to the flag bearer, chosen by their peers, to carry with them to the host city.[24]
Civil ceremonies[edit]
 Mexican sculpture about the founding of Tenochtitlan.
 Churubusco flag
The flag songs are dedicated to the flag day, it is a national holiday in Mexico. Flag Day is celebrated every year on February 24 since its implementation in 1937.[25][26] The songs were established by President of Mexico General L zaro C rdenas before the monument to General Vicente Guerrero, first to pledge allegiance to the Mexican flag and Agustin de Iturbide:
The Juramento a la Bandera
 Bandera de M xico!
Legado de nuestros h roes,
s mbolo de la unidad
de nuestros padres y nuestros hermanos.
Te prometemos ser siempre fieles
a los principios de libertad y de justicia
que hacen de nuestra patria la naci n independiente, humana y generosa
a la que entregamos nuestra existencia.
Translation: The Oath to the Flag
Flag of Mexico!
Legacy of our heroes,
symbol of the unity
of our parents and our siblings.
We promise to always be loyal
to the principles of liberty and justice
that make our homeland
the independent nation, humane and generous
to which we give our existence.
The Toque de Bandera
Se levanta en el m stil mi bandera
como un sol entre c firos y trinos
muy adentro en el templo de mi veneraci n,
oigo y siento contento latir mi coraz n
Es mi bandera, la ense a nacional,
son estas notas su c ntico marcial.
Desde ni os sabremos venerarla
Y tambi n por su amor,  vivir!
Almo y sacro pend n que en nuestro anhelo
como rayo de luz se eleva al cielo
inundando a trav s de su lienzo tricolor
inmortal nuestro ser de fervor y patrio ardor.
Es mi bandera, la ense a nacional,
son estas notas su c ntico marcial.
Desde ni os sabremos venerarla
Y tambi n por su honor,  morir!
Translation: The Salute to the Flag
My flag rises in the mast
like a sun between winds and warbles
very inside in the temple of my veneration,
I hear and feel happily my heart beating
It's my flag, the national standard,
These notes are its martial canticle.
From childhood we'll know how to venerate it
and also for its love, to live!
Venerable and sacred banner of our yearning
like a ray of light rises to the sky
flooding through its three-colored canvas
our immortal being of fervour and homeland ardour.
It's my flag, the national standard,
these notes are its martial canticle.
From childhood we'll know how to venerate it
and also for its honor, to die!
Pledge of Fidelity[edit]
The following pledge of fidelity is taken every February 22 and any day whenever new flags are given to institutions in accordance with the form established by Article 3 of the Law on the National Arms, Flag, and Anthem:[27]
Summons:Ciudadanos: Vengo en nombre de M xico, a encomendar a vuestro patriotismo, esta bandera que simboliza su independencia, su honor, sus instituciones y la integridad de su territorio.  Protest is honrarla y defenderla con lealtad, patriotismo y constancia?
Response:  S , protesto!
Challenge: Al concederos el honor de ponerla en vuestras/sus manos, la Patria conf a en que, como buenos y leales mexicanos, sabr is cumplir vuestra/su protesta.
Summons:Citizens: In the name of Mexico, to confide to your patriotism I now present this flag that symbolizes its independence, its honour, its institutions and the integrity of its territory. Do you pledge to honour and defend it with loyalty, patriotism and constance?
Response: Yes, I pledge!
Challenge: As you receive this flag in your hands, the Fatherland confides that you, as good and loyal Mexicans, will know to fulfill your pledge.
The pledge taking is taken on this day in a presentation of colours ceremony to units of the Armed Forces, National Guard, law enforcement and emergency organizations, as well as public schools and colleges of the Secretariat of Education.
Variants[edit]
Mexico (variants)Presidential Standard of MexicoUseState flag Proportion4:7
Variant of the Presidential StandardUseState flag 
Cravat
There are two variants of the national flag that are mostly used by the state and federal governments, the difference between the national flag and the variants are the designs of the coat of arms. In the first variant, which is used by the President of Mexico and secretaries of federal bodies, the entire coat of arms is coloured gold, with the exception of the tricolour ribbon, which is green, white and red, and with the stone, lake and talons of the eagle coloured in silver. In the second variant, the entire coat of arms is coloured gold, even the ribbon, lake, stone and talons. The second variant is used mostly by the state governments and federal bodies who are not able to use the first variant.[28]
Law articles[edit]
In Article 3 of the Law on the National Arms, Flag and Anthem (Ley sobre el Escudo, la Bandera y el Himno Nacionales) also describes that the national flag can be decorated with a special tie called a corbata (cravat). The corbata is composed of a bow, two ribbons of different length and both ribbons are attached with a golden tassel called fringe. The corbata is placed on the top of the flag at the point where the truck is, and the colours of the corbata match that of the national flag. Organizations and political parties can adopt their own corbatas, such as the National Action Party (PAN), which uses a white corbata with blue fringes.[29]
In Article 3 of the Flag Law does not give an official symbolism to the colors, other meanings may be given to them. Other groups have used the national colors as part of their own logos or symbols. For example, the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) political party has adopted the national colors as part of their logo. Another political party, the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD), also had the national colors as part of their logo, but changed them in the 1990s after a controversy surrounding impartiality issues, while the PRI did not.[30] Several states, such as Quer taro and Hidalgo have incorporated either elements of the national flag, or even the entire flag, into their coat of arms.
 Flag of Mexico on television.
Regulations for use[edit]
The image of the flag is protected under law. A special permit is needed to broadcast its image. In February 2010, MTV Mexico controversially canceled a much-publicized broadcast of an episode of South Park, called "Pinewood Derby", featuring the flag, because it claimed that the permit had not been issued.[31]
In 2008, Mexican pop singer Paulina Rubio was fined for posing nude
wrapped in the flag in a photo shoot for a Spanish magazine.
[32]
Others[edit]
Other flags were flown as Mexican flags, either designed to intimidate the enemy or to act as identification. These flags were considered without subsequent formal documentation as national flag and temporally situated; Flag of Francisco I. Madero (February 9, 1913), Flag of Doliente Hidalgo (January 2, 1812), Flag of Jos  Mar a Morelos y Pav n, Flag of Francisco Villa, Flag of Siera Battalion, Flag of Jalisco Battalion, Libres de Puebla Battalion, Artiller a Mina Battalion, Oaxaca Battalion, Toluca Battalion, Flag of Chihuahua Battalion, Flag of Durango Battalion, Flag of San Lorenzo Battalion, Flag of Lanceros Battalion, Flag of San Luis Potos  Battalion, Flag of Aguascalientes Battalion, Flag of Galeana Battalion (May 22, 1864), Flag of San Blas Battalion (September 24, 1846), Flag of Tres Villas Battalion, Flag of Milicias Battalion, Flag of Remixto Battalion, Flag of Quautla Battalion, Flag of 201 Squadron, Etc.[33]
Monumental flags[edit]
Main article: Banderas monumentales
 Raising of a monumental flag during a ceremony at the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education, Mexico City
In 1999, President of Mexico Ernesto Zedillo started a program erecting giant flags across the country. Directed by the Secretariat of National Defense, the banderas monumentales (monumental flags) were placed in various cities and spots, most of which are of great significance to the nation. In a decree issued on July 1, 1999, by Zedillo, the flags were to be placed in Mexico City, Tijuana, Ciudad Ju rez, and Veracruz. The decree also stipulated for the flags to measure 14.3 by 25 meters (47 by 82 ft), which are raised on flag poles that are 50 meters (160 ft) high. After these initial monumental flags were created, cities such as Ensenada, Nuevo Laredo and Canc n were reported to have their own monumental flags. Smaller flags, called banderas semi-monumentales, have been erected in smaller towns and at various educational institutes.[34]
As of December 22, 2010, the biggest Mexican flag in the world is now located in Piedras Negras, Coahuila.[35] Located at the Gran Plaza (Great Plaza) right across from International Bridge I connecting Piedras Negras with Eagle Pass, Texas. The pole is 120 meters (390 ft) in height and weighs 160 tonnes (180 short tons) making it the tallest one in Latin America and one of the tallest in the world. The flag measures 60 by 34 meters (197 by 112 ft) and weighs 420 kilograms (930 lb).[36]
Mexico's first largest monumental flag was the one located at the Mirador del Obispado in Monterrey (northeast) with a pole of 120 tonnes (130 short tons) and 100.6 meters (330 ft) in height. The flag measures 50 by 28.6 meters (164 by 94 ft) and weighs 230 kilograms (510 lb), four times the size of most other monumental flags at the time. It is located at the top of the Cerro del Obispado (Bishopric Hill) at an altitude of 775 meters (2,543 ft) above the sea level (city's altitude 538 meters or 1,765 feet).[37]
Example locations:
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Piedras Negras, Coahuila
Monterrey, Nuevo Le n
Quer taro, Quer taro
Mexico City:
Z calo, in the city center
Campo Militar Marte, military base behind Los Pinos
San Jer nimo roundabout, in Perif rico Sur
Chihuahua, Chihuahua
Ciudad Ju rez, Chihuahua
Iguala, Guerrero
Tonal , Jalisco
M rida, Yucat n
Canc n, Quintana Roo
Mexicali, Baja California
Tampico, Tamaulipas
Tijuana, Baja California
Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas
Campeche, Campeche
Veracruz, Veracruz
Acapulco, Guerrero
Dolores Hidalgo, Guanajuato
Pachuca, Hidalgo
Durango, Durango
Ensenada, Baja California
See also[edit]
Heraldry portalMexico portal
List of Mexican flags
State flags of Mexico
Flag flying days in Mexico
Himno Nacional Mexicano
Coat of arms of Mexico
References[edit]
^ Miller, Mary Ellen (2019). The Art of Mesoamerica: From Olmec to Aztec. Thames & Hudson. p. 245. ISBN 978-0-500-20450-4.
^ a b Diagrams of historical Mexican flags (in Spanish)
^ a b c Ju n L pez de Escalera Diccionario Biogr fico y de Historia de M xico, Editorial del Magisterio, M xico, 1964.
^ "Mexican Empire (1821 1823)". Fotw.vexillum.com. January 17, 2009. Archived from the original on August 10, 2004. Retrieved March 19, 2010.
^ January 7, 1822 Decree Establishing the Imperial Flag
^ "Mexico (1823-1864/1823-1880)". Fotw.vexillum.com. January 17, 2009. Archived from the original on October 16, 2005. Retrieved March 19, 2010.
^ November 1, 1865 Decree on the Imperial Arms
^ Page 45 of Adventure Guides Mexico's Pacific Coast by Vivien Lougheed, Hunter Publishing, ISBN 978-1-58843-395-4
^ Flags of the World page "Mexico  Flag without arms" Archived March 10, 2007, at the Wayback Machine (Archive page)
^ Flags of the World page "Mexico  Reverse side of the flag"[dead link]
^ Diario Oficial de la Federaci n (DOF) of May 9, 1995
^ Gabino Villasc n, Juan Manuel. "Mexico". Flags of the World. Retrieved January 18, 2013.
^ Flags, and Anthems Manual London 2012. London Organising Committee of the Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Limited. 2012. p. 91.
^ Gabino Villasc n, Juan Manuel. "Mexico". Flags of the World. Retrieved January 18, 2013.
^ Flags of the World page "Mexico" Archived March 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
^ Vexilla mundi page "Mexico" Archived February 11, 2005, at the Wayback Machine
^ Inkscape RGB to CMYK converter (approx.)
^ Adobe Photoshop RGB Translator
^ Ghisi, Enrico Il Tricolore Italiano (1796 1870) Milan: Anonima per l'Arte Della Stampa, 1931; see Gay, H. Nelson in The American Historical Review Vol. 37 No. 4 (pp. 750 751), July 1932 JSTOR 1843352
^ "Italy   Flags of the World".
^ "Mexican and Italian flag: differences and similarities". January 28, 2022.
^ "La bandiera Italiana" (in Italian). Retrieved February 17, 2016.
^ "Art culo 41 Ley Sobre el Escudo, La Bandera y el Himno Nacionales (Article 41 of the Law of the National Arms, Flag and Anthem)". Info4.juridicas.unam.mx. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved March 20, 2012.
^ 2000 ceremony in Mexico to hand the national flag over from President Zedillo to flag-bearer Fernando Platas for the Sydney Olympics, canoe.ca, August 22, 2000
^ February 24th: Mexico celebrates  D a de la Bandera 
^ "24 de febrero, D a de la Bandera" (in Spanish).
^ "Ley sobre el escudo, la bandera y el himno nacionales" (PDF). Retrieved December 13, 2018.
^ Flags of the World page "Mexico  Coat of arms" Archived November 25, 2005, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Ley sobre el Escudo, la Bandera y el Himno Nacionales" (PDF) (in Spanish).
^ Christian Science Monitor article on the PRI logo controversy[dead link]
^ Miglierini, Julian (February 10, 2010). "MTV under fire as it pulls South Park episode in Mexico". BBC News. BBC. Retrieved February 10, 2010.
^ "Multa SEGOB a Paulina Rubio for posar con bandera Mexicana". El Universal. February 14, 2008. Retrieved November 14, 2017.
^ SEDENA, Libro de banderas hist ricas
^ Installment of semi-monumental flags in Le n, Guanajuato September 9, 2005 (in Spanish)
^ "En Piedras Negras ondea la bandera de M xico m s grande del mundo". Milenio.com. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved March 20, 2012.
^ Aguilar, Hilda (December 23, 2010). "En Piedras Negras, Izan Bandera m s grande del mundo [ESPECIAL]  23/12/2010 | Peri dico Z calo". Zocalo.com.mx. Retrieved July 14, 2022.
^ Secretariat of Interior article Archived March 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish)
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to National flag of Mexico.
The Flag of Mexico Archived October 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine
Mexico at Flags of the World
Presidency of Mexico  National Symbols (in Spanish)
Artes e historia   Bandera de Mexico (in Spanish)
Las Banderas de M xico A Trav s de Su Historia (Especial: D a de la Bandera) (in Spanish)
vteLists of flags
Master list
Reference list
State-related
African derivative
Arab states
Christian
Civil flag
Country
Date of Adoption
Heads of state
Historical flags
Former sovereign states
Formerly independent
Timeline
Islamic
State flag
State flags and ensigns
Sovereign
Special and fictional
Unrecognized
Mobile military
Armed Forces
Army and Ground Forces
Air Forces
Air Forces Roundels
Air Forces Fin Flashes
Border and Coast Guard Forces
Maritime
Ministry of Defense
Naval ensigns
Naval Jack
Police Flag
Mobile civilian
Civil air
Civil and Merchant Navy
Civil ensign
Pilot boat flags and ensigns
Yacht flags and ensigns
Other entities
Active autonomist and secessionist movements
Country subdivisions
Category
Cities
Capitals
Cultural
Dependent territories
Ethnic
International Organizations
Micronations
Gallery
Olympics and the Paralympics
Political
Pride flags
Proposals
Religious
By design
(National, Gallery)By elements
Animals
Astronomical
Bicolor
Borders
British ensigns
Buildings
Canton
Circles
Color
by number
by combination
Crescents
Crosses
Cross of Trier
Nordic
Saints banners
Saints' crosses
Devices
Diamonds
Flags
Geographical
Headgear
Inscriptions
Arabic
English
Latin
Russian
Spanish
Keys
Maps
Nautical
Plants
People
Quartered
Solids
Stars
Trees
Triangles
Tribands
Two-sided
Watercraft
Weapons
By shape
Non-quadrilateral
Proportions
By nationsAfrica
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Governorates
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
counties
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
S o Tom  and Pr ncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Rhodesia
Antarctica
Ad lie Land
Argentine Antarctica
Australian Antarctic Territory
British Antarctic Territory
Chilean Antarctic Territory
Peter I Island
Queen Maud Land
Ross Dependency
Asia
Afghanistan
rebel
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Hong Kong
Macau
Cyprus
East Timor
Egypt
Georgia
India
states
armed forces
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
prefectures
municipalities
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Korea
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Philippines
provinces
Qatar
Russia
federal subjects
Sakha
Russian Navy
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Soviet Union
republics
Soviet Navy
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
Europe
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
states
Austria-Hungary
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
regions
Brittany
Corsica
 le-de-France
Occitanie
Pays de la Loire
French Empire
Georgia
Germany
states
districts
municipalities
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
regions
Kazakhstan
Kosovo
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
provinces
municipalities
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
naval and maritime
voivodeships
Portugal
personal standards of the king
municipalities
Romania
Russia
federal subjects
Sakha
Russian Navy
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Soviet Union
republics
Soviet Navy
Spain
autonomous communities
provinces
Sweden
Switzerland
cantons
Turkey
Ukraine
oblasts
United Kingdom
England
Cornwall
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
cities, towns and villages
British Empire
Vatican City
Yugoslavia
North America
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
lieutenant governors
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
states
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
states and territories
counties
cities
ensigns
jacks
armed forces
Puerto Rico
CSA
Oceania
Australia
state governors
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Norfolk Island
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
states
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
South America
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela
Names in italics indicate non-sovereign (dependent) territories, disputed states and/or former countries.
vteFlags of North AmericaSovereign states
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Dependencies andother territories
Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Cura ao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
Saint Barth lemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands
vteNational flags and coats of armsNational flags
Sovereign states
Dependent territories
Timeline
National coats of arms
Sovereign states
Dependent territories
 Heraldry portal
vte"Six flags over Texas"
  French Texas
  Spanish Texas
  Mexican Texas
  Republic of Texas
  Confederate States
  United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_Mexico&oldid=1146017381"