Private university in Washington, D.C., US
The George Washington UniversityFormer namesColumbian College (1821 1873)Columbian University (1873 1904)MottoLatin: Deus Nobis FiduciaMotto in English"God is Our Trust"[1]TypePrivate federally chartered research universityEstablishedFebruary 9, 1821; 202 years ago (1821-02-09)AccreditationMSCHEAcademic affiliationsCUWMANAICUORAUEndowment$2.8 billion (2022)[2]PresidentMark S. WrightonProvostChristopher BraceyAcademic staff2,663Students27,159 (2016)[3]Undergraduates11,244 (2016)[3]Postgraduates15,486 (2016)[3]Other students429 (2016)[3]LocationWashington, D.C., U.S.CampusUrban, 43 acres (17 ha)[4]NewspaperThe GW HatchetColors  Buff & blue[5]NicknameThe ColonialsSporting affiliationsNCAA Division I   A-10MascotGeorge[6]Websitewww.gwu.edu
The George Washington University (GW or GWU) is a private federally chartered research university in Washington, D.C. Chartered in 1821 by the United States Congress, GW is the largest institution of higher education in Washington, D.C.[7]
George Washington, the first president of the United States, advocated for the establishment of a national university in the U.S. capital in his first State of the Union address in 1790 and continued to promote this idea throughout his career and until his death in 1799.[8][9] In his will, Washington left shares in the Potomac Company to endow the university. However, due to the company's financial difficulties, funds were raised independently by Baptist ministers.[10][11] Among the founding patrons of the university were John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, and James Monroe[12] On February 9, 1821, the university was established by an Act of Congress first as Columbian College and then as Columbian University, making it one of only five universities in the United States with a congressional charter.[8][13]
The university's undergraduate and graduate schools include the Columbian College of Arts and Sciences, the Elliott School of International Affairs, the GW School of Business, the School of Media and Public Affairs, the Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public Administration, the GW Law School, and the Corcoran School of the Arts and Design. GW's main campus is located in the Foggy Bottom area of Washington, D.C. The International Monetary Fund and World Bank are located on the campus, and the White House and the U.S. Department of State are located within blocks of it. GW hosts numerous research centers and institutes, including the National Security Archive and the Institute for International Economic Policy. GW has two satellite campuses: the Mount Vernon campus, located in Washington, D.C.'s Foxhall neighborhood, and the Virginia Science and Technology Campus in Loudoun County, Virginia.
GW is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities   Very High Research Activity."[14] The university offers degree programs in seventy-one disciplines, enrolling around 11,000 undergraduate and 15,500 graduate students.[15] GW is home to extensive student life programs, a strong Greek culture, and over 450 other student organizations. The school's athletic teams, the George Washington Colonials, play in the NCAA Division I Atlantic 10 Conference. GW also annually hosts numerous political events, including the World Bank and International Monetary Fund's Annual Meetings.[16]
The university's alumni, faculty, and affiliates include 16 foreign heads of state or government, 28 United States senators, 27 United States governors, 18 U.S. Cabinet members, five Nobel laureates, two Olympic medalists, two Academy Award winners, and a Golden Globe winner.[17] GW has over 1,100 active alumni in the U.S. Foreign Service and is one of the largest feeder schools for the diplomatic corps.[18]
History[edit]
 In his last will, President George Washington left shares to endow a university in the nation's new capital.
Founding[edit]
The first President of the United States, George Washington, long favored the establishment of a university in a central part of the United States.[19] He wrote to the U.S. Congress and others in favor of it, and envisioned it would be in a central part of D.C., stating he hoped the university would educate the most promising students from across the country while reaping the benefits of the nation's capital.[19] He wished for the students to become "citizen leaders" of the new republic. Washington included a bequest of his shares in the Potomac Company in his last will and testament, though the shares lost their value and no educational institution ever benefited from them.[20][21] His desire was shared and encouraged after his death by Presidents Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, and they expressed the need to carry out Washington's plans.[12] Finally, in 1821 the Baptist missionary and leading minister Luther Rice secured funds from James Monroe, John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun and other benefactors for a college to educate citizens from throughout the young nation in Washington, D.C. A large building was constructed on College Hill, which is now known as Meridian Hill, and on February 9, 1821, President Monroe approved the congressional charter creating the non-denominational Columbian College.[22] Washingtonians, Congress and the academic community celebrated this new institution as the fulfillment of Washington's vision.[20]
GW, like much of Washington, D.C., traces many of its origins back to the Freemasons. The Bible that the President of the George Washington University uses to swear an oath on upon inauguration is the Bible of Freemason George Washington. Freemasonry symbols are prominently displayed throughout the campus including the foundation stones of many of the university buildings.[23] President James Monroe was among GW's founding benefactors and approved the university's Congressional Charter. Monroe's house is located on the university's Foggy Bottom campus.
19th century[edit]
During the Civil War, many students left to join the Confederacy and the college's buildings were used as a Union Army military hospital and barracks. Walt Whitman was among many of the volunteers to work on the campus. The faculty was split by their opposing loyalties. Dr. A.Y.P. Garnett, Professor of Anatomy since 1854, departed for the South, where he served as physician to Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederacy. Dr. Robert King Stone remained to become the personal physician to Abraham Lincoln.[24]
Following the war, in 1873, Columbian College became the Columbian University and moved to an urban downtown location centered on 15th and H streets.[25]
20th century[edit]
Columbian University was renamed The George Washington University in 1904 after an agreement with the George Washington Memorial Association to build a campus building in honor of the first U.S. president.[26] Neither the university nor the association were able to raise enough funds for the proposed building near the National Mall; however, the institution retained the name and the money that was raised went to the eventual construction of Lisner Auditorium.[27] The university moved its principal operations to the D.C. neighborhood of Foggy Bottom in 1912.[28] An engraving of the university's Meridian Hill buildingMany of the Colleges of the George Washington University stand out for their age and history. The Law School is the oldest law school in the District of Columbia.[29] The School of Medicine and Health Sciences is the 11th oldest medical school in the nation.[30] The Columbian College was founded in 1821, and is the oldest unit of the university. The Elliott School of International Affairs was formalized in 1898.[31]
In the 1930s, the university was a major center for theoretical physics. The cosmologist George Gamow produced critical work on the Big Bang theory at GW in the 1930s and 1940s. In one of the most important moments in the 20th century, Niels Bohr announced that Otto Hahn had successfully split the atom on January 26, 1939, at the Fifth Washington Conference on theoretical physics in the Hall of Government.[32]
During the Vietnam War era, Thurston Hall, an undergraduate dormitory housing 1,116 students[33] was a staging ground for student anti-war Demonstrations. (At 1900 F Street NW, the building is 3 blocks from the White House.) 
College/School
Year founded
Arts and Sciences
1821
Medicine
1824
Law
1865
Engineering
1884
Arts and Design
1890
International Affairs
1898
Education and Human Development
1909
Business
1928
Media and Public Affairs
1938
Political Management
1987
Public Health
1997
Professional Studies
2001
Public Policy and Public Administration
2003
Nursing
2010
In 1996, the university purchased the Mount Vernon College for Women in the city's Palisades neighborhood that became the school's coeducational Mount Vernon Campus. The campus was first utilized in 1997 for women only but became co-educational in a matter of years. The Mount Vernon campus is now totally integrated into the GW community, serving as a complement to the Foggy Bottom campus. In 1999, GW hosted the Town Hall with President Clinton, the first presidential town hall to ever be webcast live.
21st century[edit]
 F Street House, the official residence of GW's president. Behind it is the global headquarters of the International Monetary FundIn December 2006, the university appointed Johns Hopkins University provost Steven Knapp as the next President of the George Washington University, and his presidency began August 1, 2007.[34] In 2017, Thomas LeBlanc, provost of the University of Miami, was named the President of the George Washington University.
In July 2020, the university began forming special committees to look at possible name changes to an on-campus building and the school moniker. In a statement on the university's website, George Washington University President Thomas LeBlanc said one of the panels will examine the Colonials moniker, which critics say is antiquated and conjures up racism, violence and genocide. George Washington University law professor and Ward 3 D.C. Council member Mary Cheh will serve as chair of that committee. Another panel, to be chaired by George Washington University law professor Roger Fairfax Jr., looked into renaming the Marvin Center. The building was named after former school President Cloyd Heck Marvin, who was a known segregationist.[35]
In February 2021, the university celebrated its 200th anniversary of its Congressional Charter. GW hosted former student, Senator Elizabeth Warren as speaker.[36]
In January 2022, LeBlanc was succeeded by former Washington University in St. Louis Chancellor Mark S. Wrighton as interim university president.[37] One year later in January 2023, the university named Ellen Granberg as the new president, with a start date of July 1, 2023.
Campuses[edit]
Main article: Campuses of George Washington University
Further information: George Washington University residence halls
GW has three fully integrated campuses in the Washington, D.C. area. These are the Foggy Bottom Campus, the Mount Vernon Campus, and the Virginia Science and Technology Campus. The Foggy Bottom Campus houses the vast majority of academic programming. Residence halls exist on the Foggy Bottom and Mount Vernon campuses.
The GW library system contains the Gelman Library,[38] the Himmelfarb Health Sciences Library,[39] the Burns Law Library,[40] Eckles Library (named for Charles Ellison Eckles and Anita Heurich Eckles),[41][42] and the Virginia Science and Technology Library.[43] The GW Library System is a constituent member of the Washington Research Library Consortium, which allows for resource sharing among the university libraries of the Washington metropolitan area.
Foggy Bottom[edit]
 Lieutenant General George Washington a statue by Clark Mills on Washington Circle on the northern edge of the Foggy Bottom campus  GW's Lisner Auditorium  Foggy Bottom during Winter  Professors' Gate on the campus at 21st Street, N.W.  Rawlins Park, located between the Elliott School and the U.S. Department of the Interior  GW's Corcoran School of the Arts and Design is housed in the Corcoran Gallery, the city's oldest private cultural institution and a National Historic Landmark], located on The Ellipse, facing the White House.  Washington Metro's Foggy Bottom GW station is the only station on a university campus in DC.
The main GW campus consists of 43 acres (170,000 m2) in historic Foggy Bottom and is located a few blocks from the White House, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, State Department and the National Mall. Barring a few outlying buildings, the boundaries of campus are delineated by (running clockwise from Washington Circle) Pennsylvania Avenue, 19th Street, E Street, Virginia Avenue, 24th Street, and New Hampshire Avenue. The university owns much of the property in Foggy Bottom and leases it to various tenants, including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Other institutions in proximity include the U.S. State Department, the Kennedy Center, the U.S. Institute of Peace, the Watergate complex, and embassies of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Spain, and Uruguay. The University Yard is the main open space and historic heart of the university. Along with George Washington's main library, Gelman Library, it constitutes the hub of the main campus. The seven-story Gelman Library building contains over two million volumes and is constructed in the Brutalist architectural style of the 1970s. It features a concrete fa ade punctuated by windows that are divided by projecting vertical slabs. For most of the year, parts of the library are open 24 hours a day, seven days per week for use by students, faculty, and staff. The library's seventh floor includes the Special Collections Research Center, National Security Archives, Global Resources Center, and Kiev Library.
The National Security Archives (NSA) is a research institution that publishes declassified U.S. government files concerning selected topics of American foreign policy. It was a National Security Archive Freedom of Information Act request that eventually made the Central Intelligence Agency's so-called "Family Jewels" public.[44]
Close to the library is Lisner Auditorium and a large open area between them is known as Kogan Plaza. Southeast of the plaza and located near Monroe Hall and Hall of Government is the Monroe Court, a landscaped area with a large fountain. The Foggy Bottom GW Washington Metro station is located at the intersection of 23rd and I Streets NW due south of Washington Circle, and provides access to the Orange, Blue and Silver lines. The University Hospital is located next to the Metro station entrance.[45][46][47]
The Foggy Bottom campus contains most of the residence halls in which GW students live. The most notable include Shenkman Hall, Thurston Hall, Madison Hall, Potomac House, Fulbright Hall, Mitchell Hall, Munson Hall, Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis Hall, Phillip Amsterdam Hall, Guthridge Hall, Madison Hall, Townhouse Row, South Hall, and the newest, District House, which opened in 2016.
In late 2007, construction began on a large mixed-use residential, office and retail development located on the site of the old GW Hospital (Square 54) and just east of the Foggy Bottom GW Metrorail station. It was the second-largest undeveloped lot in the District of Columbia at the time of initial construction activity.[48] In 2014, the university assumed ownership of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, the oldest private art museum in Washington, D.C. and independent college of art and design. The college of art and design became The Corcoran School of the Arts and Design under the Columbian College of Arts and Sciences. The National Gallery of Art will acquire many of the 17,000 pieces of art from the Corcoran and the rest will be donated to other museums around the country.[49] In May 2014, GW opened the Milken Institute School of Public Health, a nine-story building that received LEED certification for sustainability features including a green roof, rainwater collection system, and special heating and air conditioning technologies that helps mass air displacement.[50] The Textile Museum reopened to the public in March 2015 after the institution merged with the university in 2011 and closed it for renovations two years later.[51]
Mount Vernon[edit]
In 1996, the university purchased the Mount Vernon College for Women in the city's Palisades neighborhood that became the school's coeducational Mount Vernon Campus. Initially, the Mount Vernon Campus remained exclusively a women's college until 1999 when GW changed its operations to a co-ed facility.[52] Now known as the Mount Vernon campus, it is totally integrated into the GW community, serving as a complement to the Foggy Bottom campus.[53] The campus has transportation systems connecting the students to the GW campus in Foggy Bottom. It also includes Eckles Library, six residence halls, Lloyd Gymnasium, The GW-Mount Vernon Athletic Complex and other various campus facilities.[54]
Virginia[edit]
Main article: George Washington University Virginia Campus
The George Washington University also operates a research and graduate campus in Ashburn, Virginia (near Dulles International Airport) which was established in 1991. Starting with a donation of 50 acres (20 ha) from Robert H. Smith, the campus grew to 101 acres (41 ha) by 2010.[55]
Additionally, the university also operates several other graduate satellite education centers. These include the Alexandria Graduate Education Center in Alexandria, the Graduate Education Center in Arlington, and the Hampton Roads Center in Newport News. The Virginia Science and Technology Campus hosts research and educational partnerships with industry and government officials and offers more than 20 graduate degrees.[56]
The Virginia Science and Technology Campus is home to the first walkable solar-power sidewalk in the world. The project began in 2012 and was completed two years later, inaugurated in October 2014.[57]
Organization[edit]
George Washington University is governed by the GW Board of Trustees, the President of the George Washington University, provost, deans, and department chairs. The university employs over 6,000 faculty members, administrators, and support staff.[58] In 2007, Steven Knapp  was named the university's sixteenth president.;[59] he had previously taught at the University of California, Berkeley and was later the provost at Johns Hopkins University. The current President of the George Washington University is Mark S. Wrighton. Ulysses S. Grant was a member of the Board of Trustees, and his Grandson, Ulysses S. Grant III, was Vice President of GW. John Quincy Adams was also a member of the board of trustees.
Schools and colleges[edit]
Undergraduate & Graduate Schools of The George Washington University
Columbian Collegeof Arts and Sciences
School of Business
Elliott Schoolof International Affairs
Milken Institute Schoolof Public Health
School of Engineering and Applied Science
School of Nursing
School of Media and Public Affairs
Graduate Schools of The George Washington University
Graduate School of Political Management
Medical School
Law School
Graduate School of Education & Human Development
Trachtenberg Schoolof Public Policy and Public Administration
College of Professional Studies
 Jean-Antoine Houdon's George Washington, a statue of George Washington in University Yard
 The George Washington University Museum
 The Corcoran School is housed in the former Corcoran Gallery of Art.
 James Monroe Hall
GW is organized into fourteen schools and colleges, each with a different dean and organization.[60] The Columbian College of Arts and Sciences was the original academic unit of the university.[61] The Medical School is the 11th oldest medical school in the nation and the first to open in the District of Columbia.[62] The Law School was also the first law school in the District of Columbia.[29] Each academic unit has a distinct identity within the broader university. The Graduate School of Political Management and the Corcoran School of the Arts and Design were organized outside of the university, later to join in 1987 and 2014, respectively.
Columbian College of Arts and Sciences[edit]
The Columbian College of Arts and Sciences (CCAS) is the oldest and largest college in the university. It was founded in 1821; at the beginning of the university's history, there was no distinction between this college and the university.  The School of Media and Public Affairs (SMPA), and the Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public Administration (SPPPA) belong to this college, although they are run separately. The Columbian College was among the first American institutions to grant a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.), in 1888.[63] The Columbian College is notable for its academic diversity, and offers a wide range of majors and courses of study.[63] The Columbian College contains the Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public Administration, the School of Media and Public Affairs, and the Corcoran School of the Arts and Design. The Columbian College is primarily housed in Philips Hall, Rome Hall, Smith Hall of Art, MPA Building, Monroe Hall, Hall of Government, 1922 F Street, Corcoran Hall, Bell Hall, Samson Hall, Lisner Hall, and many other places around campus. The college is also present on the Mount Vernon and Virginia Campuses.
Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public Administration[edit]
The Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public Administration is a graduate school in the Columbian College of Arts and Sciences.[64] Consistently ranked as one of the top Public Affairs Schools in the United States, it is ranked 11th nationwide by U.S. News & World Report. The Trachtenberg School offers Master of Public Policy, Master of Public Administration, and PhD degrees in Public Policy and Public Administration. The school works in partnership with the Elliott School of International Affairs, the School of Public Health and Health Services, and the Graduate School of Education & Human Development to offer a variety of concentrations for its graduates.
School of Media and Public Affairs[edit]
The School of Media and Public Affairs (SMPA), although run separately, belongs to the Columbian College of Arts in Sciences.[64] It offers two undergraduate degrees, Journalism and Mass Communication and Political Communication and a master's degree in Media and Public Affairs. It is housed in the same building as the Graduate School of Political Management. The Public Affairs Project at GW, part of SMPA, is responsible for the creation and production of the PBS special, Planet Forward. School of Media and Public Affairs (SMPA) was the first in the nation to offer a bachelor's degree in Political Communication. The program boasts a faculty of retired and current professionals   including CNN correspondents, journalists, political analysts, and campaign professionals. The school is consistently ranked in the top 10 programs in the nation.
Corcoran School of the Arts and Design[edit]
The Corcoran School of the Arts and Design is one of the oldest arts education institutions in the United States. It is a school of the Columbian College of Arts and Sciences.[64] It is housed in the Corcoran Gallery of Art, the oldest private cultural institution in Washington, D.C.
Formerly an independent institution, known as the Corcoran College of Art and Design, the institution later merged the college operations with the George Washington University. The school retained over 20 full-time faculty members, and the college will continue to function as a separate entity within the university. The school has a historic building facing the White House on 17th Street.
 Stockton Hall
School of Business[edit]
The George Washington School of Business was established in 1928 with a $1 million gift by the Supreme Council of Scottish Rite Freemasonry Southern Jurisdiction.[65] On February 6, 2006, the chairman and CEO of FedEx, Frederick W. Smith, opened a new complex for the school called Ric and Dawn Duqu s Hall, which today houses the business school along with the Norma Lee and Morton Funger Hall.[66]
As of January 2018[update], GW's undergraduate business program was ranked 42nd nationally and its International Business program was ranked ninth by U.S. News & World Report.[67]
School of Medicine and Health Sciences[edit]
Founded in 1824, the School of Medicine and Health Sciences (SMHS), or simply the George Washington School of Medicine, was the first school of medicine in Washington, D.C.[68]
In 1981, George Washington University Hospital became the center of the national spotlight when President Ronald Reagan was rushed to the emergency room after an attempted assassination.
GW Hospital's emergency department was later renamed the Ronald Reagan Institute of Emergency Medicine. Other politicians, such as former Vice President Dick Cheney, come to GW for routine and emergency procedures.[69] Cheney and wife Lynne Cheney helped to start the Richard B. and Lynne V. Cheney Cardiovascular Institute in 2006. Others notable patients include former First Lady Laura Bush, who was treated for a pinched nerve. GW faculty developed the recoilless anti-tank rifle, popularly known as the Bazooka.SMHS is primarily housed in the GW Hospital, Ross Hall, and many other centers along K Street and throughout the city.
GW was once home to the George Washington Dental College, but this department would close in 1921 due to budget constraints.[70][71]
School of Engineering and Applied Science[edit]
 The Elliott School of International Affairs, one of the world's most highly-ranked schools of international relations and the largest in the U.S.
The School of Engineering and Applied Science (SEAS) was founded on October 1, 1884, as the Corcoran Scientific School of Columbian University. The school separated from the Columbian College in 1962 and was one of the first to accept women for degree candidacy in engineering.[72] The bazooka was invented at the SEAS in 1942.[73] The school moved into the new Science and Engineering Hall in D.C. in March 2015.[74]
Elliott School of International Affairs[edit]
The Elliott School of International Affairs (ESIA) was founded in 1898, as the School of Comparative Jurisprudence and Diplomacy. Under President Lloyd Elliott, the school separated from Columbian College. On September 3, 2003, alumnus Colin Powell opened a new complex for this school at 1957 E Street NW in front of the Department of State.[75] As of February 2015[update], its undergraduate program was ranked eighth globally by Foreign Policy magazine, while the graduate program is currently ranked seventh in the world.[76] ESIA is primarily housed in Elliott Hall at 1957 E St.
School of Nursing[edit]
The history of nursing education at GW spans more than 100 years. In 2002, Jean Johnson, Ph.D., RN, FAAN, then senior associate dean for Health Sciences, met with the nursing faculty to assess GW's capacity to create GW's degree programs. The faculty moved forward to develop an MSN in the GW School of Medicine and Health Sciences with programs in adult nurse practitioner, family nurse practitioner, nursing leadership and management, and clinical research administration. The first MSN class was admitted in 2004.[77]
Meanwhile, approval was also obtained to develop a Department of Nursing Education. As the first and only chair of the department, Ellen Dawson, Ph.D., RN, ANP, led the MSN program to accreditation in time for the graduation of the first class in 2006. Also, she spearheaded the development of both the doctor of nursing practice (DNP) program and the 15-month (four consecutive semesters) accelerated second-degree bachelor of nursing science (ABSN) program located in Ashburn, VA. The first classes for these degrees were admitted in 2007 and 2009, respectively.[77] In 2010, the GW School of Nursing was re-established and is now the university's tenth academic institution, with Drs. Jean Johnson and Ellen Dawson as the founding deans.[77] The GW Law School, the oldest law school in the nation's capital
Law School[edit]
The George Washington University Law School was established in 1826 and is the oldest law school in the District of Columbia.[78] Supreme Court Justices Clarence Thomas, William Strong, David J. Brewer, Willis Van Devanter and John Marshall Harlan were among those who served on its faculty.[79][80] Chief Justice John Roberts, Justice Sonia Sotomayor, Justice Samuel Alito, and Justice Antonin Scalia presided over its moot court in 2006, 2007 and 2009, respectively.[81][82] The law school is located primarily on the east side of University Yard.
Graduate School of Education and Human Development[edit]
The Graduate School of Education & Human Development (GSEHD) officially started in 1909. The school is composed of five distinct academic departments, and it is one of the largest schools within GW.[83]
College of Professional Studies[edit]
The George Washington University College of Professional Studies (CPS) was founded during the Trachtenberg Presidency.[84] The Graduate School of Political Management is included within the college.[85] CPS offers courses on the Foggy Bottom and Virginia campuses.
Graduate School of Political Management[edit]
 The Milken Institute School of Public Health on Washington Circle
The Graduate School of Political Management (GSPM) is an academic unit of the College of Professional Studies. GSPM offers graduate degrees in legislative affairs, political management, and other related disciplines. The current director is Lara Brown.[86]
Milken Institute School of Public Health[edit]
Established in July 1997, and renamed in March 2014, the Milken Institute School of Public Health[87] brought together three longstanding university programs in the schools of medicine, business, and education that have since expanded substantially. Today, more than 900 students from nearly every U.S. state and more than 35 nations pursue undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral-level degrees in public health. Its student body is one of the most ethnically diverse among the nation's private schools of public health.
The School also offers an array of joint degree programs, allowing students to couple a Juris Doctor (JD) with the Master of Public Health (MPH), or to combine an MPH with a Doctor of Medicine (MD) or an MA in International Affairs. An MPH/Physician Assistant program, the first in the world, is available at the Milken Institute SPH, as is the opportunity to serve as a Peace Corps volunteer while pursuing an MPH.
Academics[edit]
 Avard Fairbanks's Busts of George Washington, located on the border of the Foggy Bottom Campus  The former home of James Monroe
Demographics of the Student Body (2015)[88][89]
Undergraduate
Graduate
U.S. (2010)
White
56.3%
47.1%
63.7%
Asian
10.2%
9.1%
4.7%
Hispanic
8.5%
5.6%
16.3%
Black
5.9%
11.0%
12.2%
Two or More Races
3.7%
1.7%
1.9%
American Indian
0.1%
0.3%
0.7%
Pacific Islander
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
International
10.0%
17.7%
N/A
Unknown
5.2%
7.3%
N/A
Male
43.6%
41.5%
49.2%
Female
56.4%
58.5%
50.8%
 A conversation between U.S. President Barack Obama and Stephen Colbert held at GW's Lisner Auditorium in 2014
 "Trump's First Year," a 2017 School of Media and Public Affairs event with White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders and chief correspondents from The New York Times, CNN, Fox News, and the president of the White House Correspondents' Association
 Hillary Clinton presenting the Clinton health care plan of 1993 at GW Hospital. Her mother died at the hospital in 2011.
Admission[edit]
GW is the largest higher education institution in Washington, D.C.[90] There are approximately 10,000 full-time undergraduates studying at George Washington University, and 14,000 graduate students.[91] These students come from all 50 states and over 120 countries.[90] Nearly 900 students participate in GW's Study Abroad Programs each semester in 50 countries.[92] As of 2015[update], George Washington University no longer required the SAT and ACT test scores for applicants in order to boost the enrollment of disadvantaged students.[93]
GW tuition was guaranteed to remain at the freshman rate for up to ten continuous (full-time) semesters of undergraduate attendance at the university. GW no longer offers fixed tuition. The 2021 2022 academic year tuition rate was $59,780.[94] Students were awarded $308.1 million in financial-aid during the 2017 2018 academic year.[95] For the FY2011 cohort of students, the student loan default rate was 1.4, one of the lowest in the nation.[96] For the 2010 2011 school year, the freshman retention rate was 94.3%.[97][needs update] GW requires that students live on campus for their first three years of enrollment as undergraduates.[98] According to self-provided data by George Washington University, as of the 2011 2012 academic year, the acceptance rate for the Medical School was 3%, receiving 10,588 applications. GW Law School's acceptance was 23%, receiving 10,021 applications. GW's Undergraduate studies' acceptance rate was 32%, receiving 21,433 applications.[99] Admission to George Washington is considered to be competitive and highly selective, with The Princeton Review rating admissions difficulty as a 93 out of 99.[100]
In September 2013, The GW Hatchet reported that the university had a need-aware admissions policy, even though it claimed to have a need-blind policy at the time. The university subsequently admitted that its admissions policy was, in fact, need-aware.[101]
Enrollment[edit]
During the 2013 2014 academic year, there were 5,015 undergraduates enrolled in the Columbian College of Arts and Sciences, 2,005 in the Elliott School of International Affairs, 1,566 in the School of Business, 774 in the School of Engineering and Applied Science, 367 in the George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 174 in the Milken Institute School of Public Health, and 153 in the School of Nursing.[102]
Students come from all 50 U.S. states. The top states include New York, California, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Florida, Illinois and Connecticut.[103]
George Washington University has many international students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. During the 2013 2014 academic year, there were over 130 countries represented among the student body. The most represented countries represented were China, South Korea, India, Saudi Arabia, Canada, Mexico, United Kingdom, Turkey, France, Nigeria, Pakistan, Japan, Iran, Germany, Brazil, Colombia, and Vietnam.[104]
Rankings[edit]
GW was ranked tied for 25th of the "Top Universities for Producing Billionaires 2016 2017" by Times Higher Education's World University Rankings, which also ranks GW as 51st of the "Top 100 Universities for Producing Millionaires" in the world.[105][106]
Apart from its 61st national ranking, Forbes ranks GW 44th among "Research Universities", 60th among "Private Colleges", 43rd among universities in the U.S. Northeast, and 287th among university rankings of "America's Best Value Colleges".[107]
GW was ranked the 66th world's wealthiest university in 2015.[108]
The Princeton Review consistently ranks George Washington University in the Top 10 for the following categories:[109]
Most Politically Active
Dorms Like Palaces
Great College Towns
Best in the Northeast
Best College Newspaper
Most Popular Study Abroad Program
Misreported admissions data
In 2012, the university received national attention when GW officials announced that they had misreported admissions data on their student body for over a decade, overstating the number of students who had graduated from high school in the top ten percent of their classes due to a "data reporting error".[110][111]  Consequently, U.S. News & World Report removed the school from its rankings and altered the GW's entry to being unranked for the 2013.[112] The university was reinstated a year later in the 2014 rankings.[113][114][115]
Program rankings
Academic rankingsNationalARWU[116]67 94Forbes[117]61THE / WSJ[118]70U.S. News & World Report[119]62Washington Monthly[120]44GlobalARWU[121]201 300QS[122]336THE[123]187U.S. News & World Report[124]247The Princeton Review ranked GW first for "Top Colleges or Universities for Internship Opportunities."[125][126] GW is consistently ranked by The Princeton Review in the top "Most Politically Active" Schools.
U.S. News & World Report ranks GW's international business program as eighth best in the world, its MBA program as 51st best, and its undergraduate business program as 38th best.[127] The Financial Times ranks GWSB as the 47th best business school in the United States.[128]
Foreign Policy ranks the Elliott School's Masters in International Affairs as the seventh best in the world in its 2018 "Inside the Ivory Tower" annual report.[129] Foreign Policy ranks the Elliott School as being the eighth in the "Top U.S. Undergraduate Institutions to Study International Relations 2018."[129]
U.S. News & World Report  ranks the Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public Administration as the 10th best public affairs school in the United States and as having the 6th best Global Policy program, 11th best public management program, the 14th best health policy program, and the 20th best social policy program in the U.S.
The 2020 U.S. News & World Report ranks GW Law School as fifth best in the U.S. for its international law program, fifth best for intellectual law, second best for part-time law, and as the 22nd best law school in the United States.[130] The National Law Journal ranked GW Law 21st for law schools that sent the highest percentage of new graduates to NLJ 250 law firms, the largest and most prominent law practices in the U.S.[131]
George Washington is ranked 61st for the "Best Global Universities for Social Sciences and Public Health 2018" by U.S. News & World Report.[132]
The Times Higher Education ranks GW as having the 64th best law program in the world in 2019.[133]
Research[edit]
 The Burns Building houses different medical research centers.
 George Washington University Hospital houses several medical programs at GW and occasionally serves the U.S. President's medical needs.
George Washington University is the largest research university in Washington, D.C.[7] According to the National Science Foundation, GW spent $260 million on research and development in 2018, ranking it 89th in the nation.[134]
Centers and institutes[edit]
Main article: List of centers and research institutes at George Washington University
George Washington University has many research centers including (non-exhaustive):[135]
[136]
Centers
Sigur Center for Asian Studies
Center for the Advanced Study of Human Paleobiology
GW Cancer Center
Center for Aging, Health, & Humanities
Center for Equity and Excellence in Education
GW Institute for Biomimetics and Bioinspired Engineering
Center for Otolaryngology Microsurgery Education & Training (COMET)
The Dr. Cyrus & Myrtle Katzen Cancer Research Center
McCormick Genomic and Proteomic Center (MGPC)
National Crash Analysis Center
Biostatistics Center
Regulatory Studies Center
Center for the Connected Consumer
The Project on Forward Engagement
GW Project on Extremism
Eleanor Roosevelt Papers Project
Jackie Robinson Project
First Federal Congress Project
The Gill-Lebovic Center for Community Health[137]
Institutes
Institute for International Economic Policy
Institute for Public Diplomacy and Global Communication
Institute for Security and Conflict Studies
Institute for International Science and Technology Policy
Institute for Global and International Studies
Institute for Disaster and Fragility Resilience
Institute for European, Russian, and Eurasian Studies
Institute for Middle East Studies
Institute for African Studies
Institute for Korean Studies
Cisneros Hispanic Leadership Institute
George Washington Institute for Neuroscience
George Washington Institute for Public Policy
GW Cancer Institute
GW Solar Institute
GW Institute for Biomedical Sciences
GW Institute for Biomedical Engineering
Rodham Institute
Ronald Reagan Institute of Emergency Medicine
Space Policy Institute
Institute for Politics, Democracy & the Internet
Institute for Security and Conflict Studies
Computational Biology Institute
Institute for Biomedical Engineering
Jacobs Institute of Women's Health
Washington Institute of Surgical Education (WISE)
Student life[edit]
 GW's commencement ceremony on the National Mall in front of the U.S Capitol  The White House, located across the street from the Corcoran School of the Arts and Design and a few blocks from the campus
 GW Student Association, the university's student government.
 Quigley's Pharmacy, which helped shelter students from tear-gas during the Watergate protests, has been a campus hub for over a century.[138]
The university is located in downtown Washington, D.C., near the Kennedy Center, embassies, and other cultural events. Students are known as highly politically active; Uni in the USA stated that "politics at George Washington is about as progressive as it gets".[139]
GW has a Division I athletics program that includes men's baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, gymnastics, women's lacrosse, women's rowing, soccer, women's softball, swimming, women's tennis, women's volleyball and men's water polo.[140] Colonials athletics teams compete in the Atlantic 10 Conference. The Division II men's and women's Rugby Teams both compete in the Potomac Rugby Union.[141]
Student organizations[edit]
 GW's Townhouse Row, home of many of its fraternities and sororities
 Old Main at 1922 F Street houses various administrative offices.
Most student organizations are run through the George Washington University Student Association (SA). The SA is fashioned after the federal government with an executive, legislative, and judicial branch.[142] There are over 500 registered student organizations on campus. The largest student organization on campus, the GW College Democrats have hosted speakers such as CNN contributor Donna Brazile and former DNC Chairman Howard Dean among many others. Likewise, the GW College Republicans, the largest CR chapter in the nation, have been visited by politicians like John Ashcroft former Florida Governor Jeb Bush and former President George W. Bush.[143] The International Affairs Society (IAS) runs the university's internationally top-ranked Model United Nations team, in addition to hosting yearly high school and middle school Model UN conferences on campus. This organization also hosts various foreign dignitaries, US Government officials, and subject matter experts to further inform and foster international understanding both in the university's student body and the greater D.C. community.
There are also several a cappella performance groups on campus. The university's school-sponsored a cappella group, the co-ed GW Troubadours, has been a presence on campus since the mid-1950s and regularly records studio albums and travels internationally with the Department of Music. The Sons of Pitch, GW's only male a cappella group, has been around since 2003, and the female group the GW Pitches was founded in 1996. All the groups are extremely committed to charity work, with the Troubadours holding an annual philanthropic concert in the fall entitled "Acappellapalooza," and the Sons of Pitch holding one in the spring named "The United States of A-Cappella." In the case of the former, groups from GW are drawn for a concert, in the latter, groups from around the nation. The groups have raised tens of thousands of dollars for various charitable causes. Additionally, the university is home to the Voice gospel choir, a group that sings gospel music, the GW Vibes, a co-ed group focusing on soulful music. The GW Sirens, another all-girls group, and the GW Motherfunkers, a coed top 40 group, were created in 2003 and 2012, respectively. Each year, the groups duke it out at the Battle of the A-Cappella groups, one of the biggest student events on GW's campus.
Another student group, the Emergency Medical Response Group (EMeRG) provides an all-volunteer 24/7 ambulance service for the campus and the Foggy Bottom/West End community at no cost. EMeRG has been active on campus since 1994 and has advanced from bike response into a two ambulance system that is sanctioned by the District of Columbia Department of Health and DC Fire and EMS (DCFEMS). EMeRG also plays an active role in special events in around the DC area including the Marine Corps Marathon, National Marathon, Cherry Blossom Race, Commencement, Inauguration and other events in downtown D.C. and on the National Mall.[144]
Greek life[edit]
GW has a large Greek community with over 3,000 students consisting of just under 27 percent of the undergraduate population.[145] Greek organizations are divided up between and governed by the Inter-Fraternity Council with 14 chapters, the Panhellenic Association with 11 chapters, and the Multicultural Greek Council with 13 chapters.[145] Other Greek-life, known as "Alternative Greek Life" or simply "Alt-Greek", exists on campus in the form of professional, community-serviced based and honor groups although not under the university's traditional Greek life governing structure but instead are considered separate student organizations
Scholarly societies[edit]
There are chapters of many varied academic groups at the university. The local chapter of the Society of Physics Students was at one time under the auspices of world-renowned scientists like George Gamow, Ralph Asher Alpher, Mario Schoenberg and Edward Teller, who have all taught at the university. The Enosinian Society, founded in 1822, is one of the university's oldest student organizations. Invited speakers included Daniel Webster.[146]
Campus media[edit]
There are four major news sources on campus: the independent student-run newspaper The GW Hatchet, which publishes articles online daily and a print edition weekly; The Rival GW,[147] an online-only student-run publication;[148] the online-only radio station, WRGW; and the university's official news source, GW Today. GW also publishes a peer-reviewed journal, The International Affairs Review, which is run by graduate students at the Elliott School.
Environmental sustainability[edit]
George Washington University was ranked number 12 on The Sierra Club's magazine "Cool Schools List" for 2014[149] and was included in the Princeton Review's Guide to 322 Green Schools for 2013. The campus has a campus-wide building energy efficiency program along with nine LEED-certified buildings[150] including the Milken Institute School of Public Health building.[151][152] In 2016, university officials rejected demands by the student body for the university to divest from fossil fuels.[153]
Athletics[edit]
Main article: George Washington Colonials
 GW athletics teams, collectively known as the Colonials.
George Washington University is a member of the Atlantic 10 Conference and most of its teams play at the NCAA Division I level. All indoor sports play at the Smith Center on the Foggy Bottom campus. The outdoor events are held at the Mount Vernon campus Athletic Complex. The university's colors are buff and blue (buff being a color similar to tan, but sometimes represented as gold or yellow). The colors were taken from George Washington's uniform in the Revolutionary War. The teams have achieved great successes in recent years including a first-round victory in the Men's NCAA Division I Soccer Tournament in 2004. The men's and women's varsity crew team rows out of Thompson's Boat Center on the Potomac River and competes in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges. In the 2008 09 season, the men's crew team placed an all-time high national ranking of 12th in the country. The sailing team competes in the Middle Atlantic Intercollegiate Sailing Association while the gymnastics team competes in the East Atlantic Gymnastics League. In 2007 the GW Men's Water Polo team placed third at Eastern Championships and was ranked 14th in the nation. Officials announced that seven teams, such as "men's rowing, sailing, men s and women s squash, men s indoor track, men s tennis and women s water polo will be eliminated" after the 2020 2021 school year, due to financial concerns resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. These programs have the opportunity to become club sports following their elimination.[154]
Basketball[edit]
Main article: George Washington Colonials men's basketball
 GW fans storm the court after the Colonials defeated the Virginia Cavaliers in 2015.
Mike Jarvis coached GW in the 1990s, and led the team to the NCAA Sweet 16 in 1993, where they were beaten by the Fab Five University of Michigan team (which later vacated its wins due to NCAA rule violations). Jarvis also coached former Colonials head coach Karl Hobbs in high school. Former NBA player Yinka Dare also played at George Washington for two years before being drafted in the first round by the New Jersey Nets.
Under former head coach Karl Hobbs, GW's basketball team returned to the national stage in 2004 after defeating No. 9 Michigan State and No. 12 Maryland in back to back games to win the 2004 BB&T Classic. That year, the men's basketball team went on to win the Atlantic 10 West Title and the Atlantic 10 Tournament Title, earning an automatic bid to the 2005 NCAA tournament. The team received a No. 12 seed, losing to No. 5 seed Georgia Tech in the first round. GW women's basketball, 1915.The team began the 2005 06 season ranked 21st in the Associated Press poll, reaching as high as sixth in the polls, and after some tournament success they closed out the year ranked 19th in the nation. They had a record of 26 2 going into the 2006 NCAA tournament. The 2005 06 team achieved the school's highest ranking in the last 50 years, peaking at No. 6 in the nation,[155] had been one of the team's best and received an #8 seed in the NCAA Tournament. In the tournament, they came back from an 18-point second-half deficit to defeat #9 seed UNC-Wilmington, but lost to Duke University, the top overall seed, in the second round.
While only one Colonial from the 2005 06 team was drafted in the 2006 NBA Draft, J. R. Pinnock, two other Colonials from that team have played in the NBA. Pops Mensah-Bonsu played for the Dallas Mavericks, Houston Rockets, San Antonio Spurs and Toronto Raptors and Mike Hall played for the Washington Wizards.
The 2006 07 basketball season was considered by many[156][157] to be a rebuilding year for the Colonials after graduating their entire starting front court and losing Pinnock to the NBA. Coach Karl Hobbs and Senior guard Carl Elliott managed to lead the team to a 23 8 record, winning the 2007 Atlantic 10 tournament in Atlantic City, New Jersey, once again earning an auto-bid to the NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship. The Colonials were placed as a #11 seed lost to No. 6 seed Vanderbilt University in Sacramento, CA, 77 44.[158] The Charles E. Smith Center, home of the GW ColonialsHobbs, a former player and coach under Jim Calhoun at the University of Connecticut coached the Colonials for 10 years. Known for his animated sideline personality[159][160] Hobbs had been considered one of the up-and-coming coaches in the NCAA. On April 25, 2011, the university released Hobbs from his contractual obligations, forcing him to resign as men's basketball coach[161][162][163]
In May 2011, Incoming Athletic Director Patrick Nero hired former University of Vermont head coach Mike Lonergan to take over the men's basketball program.[164] The Bowie, Md. native had a slow start to his GW tenure, finishing 10 21 in his first full year as coach, and improving to 13 17 in the second.[164] The 2013 14 season solidified his hiring,[165] as the team finished 24 9 on the year, tallying the second-most wins in a season in GW history; took third place in the Atlantic 10 standings and made it to the Atlantic 10 Championship semifinals; and earned the program's 11th bid to the NCAA Tournament, their first in seven years.[166]
The NCAA committee selected the Colonials as the #9 seed in the East Region for the tournament.[167] They faced #8 seed Memphis in the second round. The Tigers took a five-point lead over the Colonials into the half, but the Colonials almost came back to win. A late rally cut the Memphis lead to only one point with 25 seconds to go, but the Colonials could not hold on and lost, 71 66.[168]
Soon after the end of the Colonials' successful 2013 14 campaign, Lonergan signed a contract extension, keeping him with the program through the 2020 21 season.[166]
The Colonials won the 2016 National Invitation Tournament, defeating Hofstra, Monmouth, Florida, San Diego State and Valparaiso for the first postseason national title in their history. Prior to the 2016 2017 season, Mike Lonergan was removed as head coach following allegations of verbal abuse from players and staff.[169] He was replaced by assistant coach Maurice Joseph who served as interim head coach before being signed fully following the 2016 2017 basketball season.[170] The River Horse, GW's unofficial mascotOne of Lonergan's players, Yuta Watanabe, was the first Japanese-born student athlete to secure an NCAA Division I basketball scholarship.[171] Watanabe now plays in the NBA, and is the second Japanese player ever in the NBA.
In March 2019, GW hired Jamion Christian to be its next head men's basketball coach.[172] After three years at GW, Christian was fired and Chris Caputo was hired from the University of Miami.
Baseball[edit]
The GW baseball team, founded in 1891, is a member of the Atlantic 10 Conference, which is part of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I. The team plays its home games at Barcroft Park in Arlington County, Virginia, and Gregg Ritchie is the team's coach.
Football[edit]
Main article: George Washington Colonials football
GW had a college football team from 1881 to 1966. The team played home games primarily at Griffith Stadium and later at RFK Stadium. In 1966, the football program was discontinued due to a lack of adequate facilities and the university's desire to develop an on-campus fieldhouse for basketball and other sports.[173] GW has one alumni in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, Alphonse Leemans.
Spirit programs[edit]
The GW Spirit Program includes a co-ed Cheer Team, the First Ladies Dance team, and the university mascot.[174] The Colonials mascot is named George, and is portrayed by a student wearing an outfit inspired by a uniform worn by General Washington.[175] In 2012, George took first place at the National Cheerleaders Association Mascot Competition and is the university's first national champion.[176][177] The spirit program also includes the Colonial Brass, directed by Professor Benno Fritz.[178]
The official fight song is "Hail to the Buff and Blue", composed in 1924 by GW student Eugene F. Sweeney and rewritten in 1989 by Patrick M. Jones.[179] The song is tolled twice-daily by bells atop Corcoran Hall, at 12:15pm and 6:00pm.
Club sports[edit]
The university also has various club sports, which are not varsity sports, but compete against other colleges. Examples include: boxing, basketball, volleyball, ice hockey, figure skating, fencing, lacrosse, rugby, soccer, triathlon, tennis, ultimate frisbee, cricket, water polo, equestrian and others.[180]
Notable people[edit]
Notable alumni[edit]
Main article: List of George Washington University alumni
See also: List of George Washington University Law School alumni, List of Elliott School of International Affairs people, List of Columbian College of Arts and Sciences people, and List of The George Washington School of Business people
Notable George Washington University Alumni Include:
William Greenleaf Eliot, founder of Washington University in St. Louis; Columbian College, 1831
Hsu Mo, founding judge of the International Court of Justice; Law School
Belva Ann Lockwood, first woman to argue before the U.S. Supreme Court; Law School
Syngman Rhee, first president of South Korea; Columbian College, '07
J. Edgar Hoover, first FBI Director; Law School
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, former First Lady of the United States; Columbian College '51
George W. Romney, former American Motors president, Governor of Michigan, and U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development; Columbian College
L. Ron Hubbard, Church of Scientology founder; Columbian College
J. William Fulbright, former U.S. Senator and founder of the Fulbright Program;  Law School, '34
Kun-Hee Lee, Chairman of Samsung;  School of Business, '66
Elizabeth Warren, U.S. Senator from Massachusetts; Columbian College
William Barr, Attorney General; Law School
Harry Reid, Senate Majority Leader from Nevada; Law School
Eric Cantor, House Majority Leader from Virginia; Columbian College
Colin Powell, 65th U.S. Secretary of State;  School of Business, '71
Former U.S. Secretary of Defense Mark Esper;  Trachtenberg School, '08
Tammy Duckworth, Senator from Illinois; Elliot School
Mark Warner, U.S. Senator from Virginia; Columbian College, '77
John Shalikashvili, Supreme Allied Commander and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Elliot School, '70
Michael Coats, astronaut and Space Shuttle Commander; School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Glenn Greenwald, Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist;  Columbian College, '90
Chuck Todd, television journalist and moderator of Meet The Press; Media and Public Affairs
Brian Williams, Journalist, News Anchor; Columbian College
Bob Woodward, Pulitzer Prize-winning editor for the Washington Post
Kerry Washington, actress; Columbian College '98
Alec Baldwin, Actor; Corcoran School
Jared Leto, actor; Corcoran School
David Lynch, filmmaker, painter, musician, singer, sound designer, photographer, and actor; Corcoran School, '64
George Washington University alumni have included many current and past political figures, both in the United States and abroad. 16 GW alumni have served as foreign heads of state or government (4 currently serving as of 2019). Many alumni have held U.S. Cabinet positions, including former Attorney General William Barr, former acting Secretary of Defense Mark Esper, and former Secretary of the Interior David Bernhardt. GW is one of the schools with the most alumni that have served in the U.S. Congress.[181] Notable recent GW alumni members of congress include Harry Reid (Senate Majority Leader for most of the Obama Presidency), Elizabeth Warren (2020 presidential candidate), Eric Cantor (House Majority Leader, 2011 2014), and Robert Byrd (President pro tempore of the Senate under President Bush and President Obama). Alumni have served as governors of 19 U.S. states, as well as the District of Columbia and Guam, among others. Some alumni serving in President Trump's White House include current White House Director of Strategic Communications Mercedes Schlapp and White House Cabinet Secretary Bill McGinley. Other prominent U.S. politicians include Senator J. William Fulbright, former Secretary of State Colin Powell, former FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, former CIA Director Allen Dulles and his brother, former Secretary of State John Foster Dulles. Also, current Premier of Bermuda Edward David Burt (youngest in history) and current Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Bhutan Tshering Wangchuk are GW alumni. Former associate director for National Preparedness at the United States Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), John Brinkerhoff was a GW alumni.
In business, Lee Kun-hee (MBA), Chairman of Samsung who is credited with transforming the company into one of the largest electronics manufacturers, Scott Kirby (MS), CEO of United Airlines, Kathy J. Warden (MBA), President and CEO of Northrop Grumman and John F.W. Rogers (BA), Executive Vice President, Chief of Staff and Secretary to the Board of Goldman Sachs. Notable company founders include Robert A. Altman (JD), co-founder of ZeniMax Media, Elaine Wynn, co-founder of Wynn Resorts, and Tom Cortese, co-founder of Peloton.   
Science and technology alumni include Julius Axelrod (PhD), Nobel Laureate and medical researcher, Ralph Asher Alpher, National Medal of Science laureate, physicist and "father" of the Big Bang theory, Jack Edmonds, noted computer scientist and mathematician and one of the creators of combinatorial optimization, Walter O. Snelling, who first identified propane and researched how propane could be liquefied and used as a viable energy resource, Charles Browne Fleet, inventor of ChapStick. In addition, 7 NASA astronauts are alumni, including Charles Camarda and Serena Au n-Chancellor.
In arts, entertainment and media, writer and filmmaker William Peter Blatty (MA), author of The Exorcist, which he adapted for the screen and won the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. Emmy winning actors Alec Baldwin and Kerry Washington are also alumni, while filmmaker and Palme d'Or recipient David Lynch, Oscar winning actor Jared Leto and portrait painter Ned Bittinger attended the Corcoran School of the Arts and Design. Journalism alumni include Pulitzer Prize winner Glenn Greenwald, CNN commentators Dana Bash and Chuck Todd as well as NBC News reporter Kasie Hunt. 
Leaders of academic institutions include William Greenleaf Eliot co-founder of Washington University in St. Louis, Derek Bok (AM), president of Harvard University, Scott Cowen (MBA), president of Tulane University and John T. Wilson, president of University of Chicago. 
Well known athletes and sports personnel include Boston Celtics coach Red Auerbach (BA, MA), winner of nine NBA championships as a head coach with an additional seven as a general manager for grand total of 16 NBA championships. Many players have been drafted into NBA such as Yinka Dare and Yuta Watanabe. Other notable athletes include WNBA star Jonquel Jones, NFL Hall of Fame running back Tuffy Leemans, and Olympic medalist Elena Myers. Several alumni have owned sports teams including Ted Lerner, owner of the Washington Nationals, Abe Pollin, owner of the Washington Wizards and Washington Capitals, Jerry Reinsdorf, owner of the Chicago Bulls and the Chicago White Sox. 
Notable faculty and trustees[edit]
Main pages: List of George Washington University faculty and Category:George Washington University trustees
See also: List of Elliott School of International Affairs people, List of Columbian College of Arts and Sciences people, and List of The George Washington School of Business people
Notable George Washington University faculty and trustees include:
John Quincy Adams, President of the United States; trustee
Ulysses S. Grant, President of the United States; trustee
Robert Cutler Hinckley, American portraitist known for portraits of eminent Americans; faculty member
Jos  Andr s, National Humanities Medal winning chef; faculty member
Alexander Graham Bell, inventor of the telephone; trustee
George Gamow, physicist known for Big Bang Theory; faculty member
David J. Brewer, U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice; faculty member
William Wilson Corcoran, Corcoran Gallery of Art founder; trustee
William J. Crowe, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman; faculty member
Willis Van Devanter, former U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice; faculty member
Al Gore, former U.S. Vice President and climate activist; faculty member
Phil Graham, former Washington Post owner; trustee
Ulysses S. Grant III, U.S. Army officer and grandson of President Grant; trustee
John Marshall Harlan, former U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice; faculty member
Eric Holder, former U.S. Attorney General; trustee
Ketanji Brown Jackson, U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice; faculty member
Ferid Murad, pharmacologist and Nobel Prize winner; faculty member
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Islamic Traditionalist Philosopher; faculty member
Marcus Raskin, political theorist; faculty member
William Strong, former U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice; faculty member
Edward Teller, nuclear physicist known as "the father of the hydrogen bomb"; faculty member
Jonathan Turley, U.S. Constitution law scholar and Attorney for the President; faculty member
Dana Perino, White House Press Secretary and political commentator; faculty member
Clarence Thomas, U.S. Supreme Court Justice; faculty member
Tom Perez, Chair of the Democratic National Committee and United States Secretary of Labor; faculty member
Notable GW faculty include Tom Perez, former Chair of the Democratic National Committee; two current Supreme Court Justices, Clarence Thomas and Ketanji Brown Jackson; George Gamow, developer of the Big Bang theory; Edward Teller, "father of the hydrogen bomb"; Vincent du Vigneaud, Nobel Prize in Chemistry winner; John Negroponte, first Director of National Intelligence; Thomas Buergenthal, former President of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights; Masatoshi Koshiba, Nobel Prize in Physics winner; Scott Pace, current Executive Secretary of the National Space Council; Amitai Etzioni, former President of the American Sociological Association; Marshall Warren Nirenberg, Nobel Prize in Medicine winner; Edward P. Jones, Pulitzer Prize winner; Abba Eban, former Vice President of the United Nations General Assembly; Dana Perino, former White House Press Secretary; and Ferid Murad, Nobel Prize in Medicine winner.
Other faculty have included Frank Sesno, CNN former Washington, D.C. Bureau Chief and Special Correspondent; James Carafano, Heritage Foundation national security and homeland security expert; Leon Fuerth, former national security adviser to Vice President Al Gore; James Rosenau, political theorist and former president of the International Studies Association; Steven V. Roberts, American journalist, writer and political commentator and former senior writer at U.S. News & World Report; Nancy E. Gary, former dean of Albany Medical College, Executive Vice President of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and Dean of its F. Edward H bert School of Medicine, Roy Richard Grinker, anthropologist specializing in autism and North-South Korean relations, Edward P. Jones, who won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 2004, novelist Herman "H.G." Carrillo, historian Jessica Krug, Dagmar R. Henney, Mohammad Nahavandian (economics), chief of staff of the President of Iran since 2013, and Faure Essozimna Gnassingb  (MBA), president of Togo since 2005, Dr. Blake R. Van Leer, president of Georgia Tech, Colonel and Civil Rights advocate.
See also[edit]
United States portal
Campuses of George Washington University
GW-TV
Hail to the Buff and Blue
List of centers and research institutes at George Washington University
National Security Archive
The GW Hatchet
United States v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures
WRGW
References[edit]
^ "University Traditions & Spirit". The George Washington University Student & Academic Support Services. Archived from the original on June 16, 2010. Retrieved August 4, 2010.
^ "Moody's affirms George Washington University's (DC) A1 issuer and revenue bond ratings; outlook stable". Moodys.com. October 26, 2022.
^ a b c d "The George Washington University Enrollment Dashboard". The George Washington University Office of Institutional Research & Planning. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016.
^ "College Navigator - George Washington University". nces.ed.gov.
^ GW Identity Guidelines (PDF). George Washington University. August 1, 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 20, 2016. Retrieved October 11, 2015.
^ "other_names and Mascots". Retrieved May 16, 2018.[dead link]
^ a b "Biggest Colleges in District Of Columbia 2021 - CollegeStats.org". collegestats.org. Retrieved April 7, 2021.
^ a b Thomas, George (2014). The Founders and the Idea of a National University. Cambridge University Press. pp. 2 8, 31, 70 82. ISBN 978-1-316-03334-0. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017.
^ Meyers, Debra; Miller, Burke (2009). Inequity in Education: A Historical Perspective. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 35, 44. ISBN 978-0-7391-3397-2. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017.
^ "A Brief History of GW | GW Libraries".
^ Claussen, Martin Paul, Jr (1968). "The Fate of Washington's Bequest to a National University". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 9, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)(Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.)
^ a b "Columbian College 1821-1824: The Early Years | Libraries & Academic Innovation". library.gwu.edu. Retrieved October 25, 2022.
^ "About the University: Overview". University Bulletin. The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017.
^ "Carnegie Classifications - Institution Profile". Indiana University Center for Postsecondary Research. Retrieved March 30, 2020.
^ "International Services Office". International Services. George Washington University. 2017. Archived from the original on April 25, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
^ Dunkins, Brittney. "Five Updates on the Global Economy from Christine Lagarde's 'Hardtalk' Interview". GW Today. The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019.
^ "GW Alumni Association | The George Washington University". www.alumni.gwu.edu. Retrieved June 6, 2021.
^ "Top Foreign Service Feeder Schools". American Foreign Service Association. 2015. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
^ a b "Founders Online: George Washington's Last Will and Testament, 9 July 1799". founders.archives.gov. Retrieved March 29, 2022.
^ a b Lyle Slovick (December 21, 2006). "The Fate of Washington's Bequest to a National University". GW and Foggy Bottom Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on March 9, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015.
^ "George Washington's Last Will and Testament". U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on October 1, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2015.
^ William F. Zeman (February 9, 2011). "Today in D.C. History: Charter Signed for GW's Predecessor School". Washington City Paper. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015.
^ "Building the University: Freemasonry, SJT, and GW". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on March 24, 2008. Retrieved November 1, 2007.
^ "A Brief History of GW - GWUEncyc". web.archive.org. June 13, 2010. Retrieved April 13, 2023.
^ "History". George Washington University. Archived from the original on August 4, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015.
^ "Columbian University Becomes George Washington University in 1904". Ghosts of DC. December 4, 2012. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
^ Luzer, Daniel (September October 2010). "The Prestige Racket". Washington Monthly. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved September 23, 2011.
^ "Brief History of GW". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on June 13, 2010. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ a b "History". George Washington University Law School. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "About". School of Medicine and Health Sciences. Archived from the original on January 19, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "Mission". Elliott School of International Affairs. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ David W. Hafemeister (1991). Physics and Nuclear Arms Today. Springer.
^ "Thurston Hall". Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 11, 2014.
^ "Johns Hopkins Provost To Succeed Trachtenberg". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on January 29, 2007. Retrieved February 23, 2007.
^ "GWU committees to explore Colonials other_name, Marvin Center". WTOP. July 20, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2020.
^ "GW's Bicentennial Celebration | The George Washington University". bicentennial.gwu.edu. Retrieved October 28, 2021.
^ Trivedi, Isha (September 10, 2021). "Interim president to replace LeBlanc in January". The GW Hatchet. Hatchet Publications Inc. Retrieved January 1, 2022.
^ "About the Library". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on February 4, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "Himmelfarb Headlines". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on January 27, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "Friends of the Jacob Burns Law Library". Law.gwu.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2008. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ [https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/lifestyle/1987/09/05/the-campus-quandary-three-solutions/382acc81-d783-4726-bee0-7cdf87128de7/ 
THE CAMPUS QUANDARY THREE SOLUTIONS]
^ "Welcome to the Eckles Library". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on January 8, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "Welcome to the Library". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "The CIA's Family Jewels". National Security Archive. Archived from the original on May 3, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ "Democratic Senator Critical After Brain Surgery". Dallas Morning News. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved December 14, 2006.
^ "20 Years Since Reagan Shot". CBS News. March 30, 2001. Archived from the original on May 21, 2008. Retrieved December 13, 2007.
^ "Cheney visits GW hospital". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on March 24, 2008. Retrieved December 13, 2007.
^ "DC Commission Approves Square 54 Plans". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on July 1, 2007. Retrieved February 1, 2007.
^ David Montgomery (February 19, 2014). "Corcoran Gallery of Art and College to split apart, Partnering with National Gallery, GWU". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
^ Jill Nolin (July 6, 2014). "New Building at George Washington University certified LEED platinum". American School and University. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
^ Kristen Page-Kirby (March 19, 2015). "The Textile Museum's new George Washington University home unites historic fabric and D.C. history". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 24, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
^ Garance Franke-Ruta (November 12, 1999). "Tenure Bender". Washington City Paper. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2015.
^ Strauss, Valerie (January 2, 1998). "GWU Takes Control of D.C. College". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 30, 2020. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ "Mount Vernon Campus". George Washington University. Archived from the original on April 1, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015.
^ "Virginia Science and Technology Campus". The GW and Foggy Bottom Historical Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2014.
^ "Virginia Science & Technology Campus". George Washington University. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
^ "Walking on Sunshine at GWU's Virginia Campus". The Washington Post. January 6, 2014. Archived from the original on November 20, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
^ "Leadership". George Washington University. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
^ Tom Fox (December 9, 2011). "Steven Knapp on Fostering Leadership at George Washington University". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015.
^ "Colleges & Schools". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on November 25, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012.
^ "About Us - Columbian College of Arts & Sciences". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "History". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ a b "Columbian College of Arts and Sciences". George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ a b c "Departments & Programs - Columbian College of Arts & Sciences". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on January 8, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "Business and Public Management, School of - GWUEncyc". Encyclopedia.gwu.edu. Archived from the original on April 23, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "History of the School of Business". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ "2018 Best Undergraduate International Business Programs". Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
^ "About the School". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on November 15, 2007. Retrieved November 14, 2007.
^ "Vice President Dick Cheney visits GW hospital for second time in a month". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on March 24, 2008. Retrieved November 14, 2007.
^ Noted in a list of former departments, accessed 18 May 2022.
^ "Proceedings of the National Association of Dental Examiners". 1905. p. 56. Retrieved May 18, 2022.
^ "Engineering Change, One PhD at a Time". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved November 14, 2007.
^ "School of Engineering and Applied Sciences". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ "The George Washington University Opens Science and Engineering Hall, Largest Building of Its Kind in D.C." Archived from the original on February 18, 2017. Retrieved February 17, 2017.
^ "Elliott School of International Affairs". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ "The Best International Relations Schools in the World". Foreign Policy. February 3, 2015. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2015.
^ a b c "History - SON - School of Nursing". gwu.edu. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "A Brief History". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on January 15, 2008. Retrieved November 14, 2007.
^ "Probing the Law School's Past: 1821 1962". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010. Retrieved April 19, 2009.
^ "Supreme Court justice joins faculty". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on January 28, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2011.
^ "Roberts judges moot court competition". Gwhatchet.com. February 13, 2006. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "Moot Court Competition". C-SPAN. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2012.
^ "Fast Facts". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved December 13, 2007.
^ "GW College of Professional Studies". Gwu.edu. Archived from the original on October 19, 2006. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "Graduate School of Political Management". Gwu.edu. June 12, 2012. Archived from the original on October 9, 2010. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "Dr. Lara Brown". Graduate School of Political Management (GSPM) at the George Washington University. Archived from the original on November 18, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2018.
^ "GWU to receive $80 million for public health; donors are Milken and Redstone". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ "Enrollment by Ethnic Group, Sex, Level, and School". George Washington University - Office of Institutional Research & Planning. 2015. Archived from the original on August 31, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016.
^ See Demographics of the United States for references. The 2010 Census percentages provided in the Race / Ethnicity section (first table) are used because they are mutually exclusive in the same way that the university measures the categories.
^ a b "George Washington University Fact Sheet" (PDF). George Washington University. January 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 13, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015.
^ "GW by the Numbers". George Washington University. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015.
^ "The George Washington University - Admissions". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on December 9, 2006. Retrieved February 1, 2007.
^ "One of America's Top Universities Is Ditching the SAT to Boost Student Enrollment". TakePart. July 28, 2015. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved October 11, 2015.
^ "Undergraduate Tuition | GW Student Accounts Office | The George Washington University". studentaccounts.gwu.edu. Retrieved November 1, 2021.
^ "Facts and Dashboards | Institutional Research | The George Washington University". irp.gwu.edu. Retrieved November 1, 2021.
^ "Cohort Data". Retrieved June 6, 2015.[dead link]
^ "Office of Institutional Research & Planning : Enrollment and Persistence" (PDF). Gwu.edu. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "Housing Residency Requirement - GW Housing - Division of Student Affairs - The George Washington University". Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015.
^ "The George Washington University Financial Report 2012-2013" (PDF). Finance.gwu.edu. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "George Washington University - The Princeton Review College Rankings & Reviews". www.princetonreview.com. Retrieved April 7, 2021.
^ Peralta, Eyder (October 21, 2013). "George Washington University Misrepresented Its Admission Policy". npr.org. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved February 3, 2015.
^ "Fall 2013 Enrollment by Group, Gender, Level, and School". Gwu.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 5, 2014. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "Domestic Undergraduate Enrollment Ranked by Top 20 States" (PDF). Office of Institutional Research & Planning. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "International Students by Country and Level Unduplicated Headcount" (PDF). Office of Institutional Research & Planning. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ Parr, Chris (November 4, 2013). "World's top 100 universities for producing millionaires". The Times Higher Education. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013.
^ Parr, Chris (November 7, 2016). "World's top 100 universities for producing Billionaires". The Times Higher Education. Archived from the original on November 20, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2016.
^ "George Washington University: At a Glance". GW Hatchet. September 2022. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2022.
^ "The 100 Richest Universities: Their Generosity and Commitment to Research 2018". TheBestSchools.org. May 20, 2015. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved February 21, 2018.
^ "The George Washington University". Princeton Review. Archived from the original on December 13, 2006. Retrieved February 1, 2007.
^ Weinberg, Cory (November 8, 2012). "University admits it misreported data for more than a decade". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on November 18, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2012.
^ Weinberg, Cory (November 12, 2012). "GW under scrutiny for inflated admissions data". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on November 26, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2012.
^ "George Washington University". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2012.
^ "U.S. News Releases 2014 Best College Rankings". CBS. September 10, 2013. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
^ Weinberg, Cory (November 14, 2012). "U.S. News kicks GW out of rankings after data misreporting". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on November 17, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2012.
^ Kingkade, Tyler (November 14, 2012). "George Washington University Loses U.S. News 'Best Colleges' Ranking Over Data Inflation". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2012.
^ "ShanghaiRanking's Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "Forbes America's Top Colleges List 2022". Forbes. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "Wall Street Journal/Times Higher Education College Rankings 2022". The Wall Street Journal/Times Higher Education. Retrieved July 26, 2022.
^ "2022-2023 Best National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "2022 National University Rankings". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "ShanghaiRanking's Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ "QS World University Rankings 2023: Top global universities". Quacquarelli Symonds. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ "World University Rankings 2023". Times Higher Education. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ "2022-23 Best Global Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ "GW ranks No. 1 for student internships". GW Hatchet. February 3, 2016. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2018.
^ "Best Schools for Internships". The Princeton Review. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2018.
^ "George Washington University -- Best Colleges Overall Rankings". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2019.
^ "Business school rankings from the Financial Times". FT.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019.
^ a b "The Best International Relations Schools in the World". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019.
^ "George Washington University". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018.
^ "Explore the Data Behind the Go-To Law Schools". National Law Journal. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2014.
^ "Best Global Universities for Social Sciences and Public Health". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on March 9, 2018. Retrieved February 21, 2018.
^ "About George Washington University". Times Higher Education. March 25, 2019. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019.
^ "Table 20. Higher education R&D expenditures, ranked by FY 2018 R&D expenditures: FYs 2009 18". ncsesdata.nsf.gov. National Science Foundation. Retrieved July 30, 2020.
^ "Centers and Institutes - The George Washington University". Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015.
^ "Chartered Centers & Institutes - By Alphabetical Order". Retrieved February 21, 2023.
^ "Gift to GWU establishes community health center in Latin America". Philanthropy News Digest. May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022.
^ "About | Tonic at Quigley's Pharmacy in Washington, DC". Tonic at Quigley's Pharmacy | American Restaurant in Washington, DC. Retrieved November 29, 2022.
^ "Top University In USA | Best Universities In USA | University In The USA". Uniintheusa.com. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "GW Men's Basketball On Display At Open Practice". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on March 24, 2008. Retrieved October 25, 2007.
^ "Rugby Squad Scrums in DC". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on October 20, 2007. Retrieved October 25, 2007.
^ "About the SA". GW Student Association. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved November 14, 2007.
^ Milbank, Dana (March 14, 2006). "Bush's Refrain on Iraq Joined by a Smaller and Smaller Chorus". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ GWU, EMeRG. "Emergency Medical Response Group". GWU EMeRG. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved March 20, 2011.
^ a b "Greek Life Office". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017.
^ "Edward Teller Chronology". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ "The Rival GW". The Rival GW.
^ "The Rival at George Washington University - Home". gw.therival.online. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2017.
^ "Cool Schools 2014: Full Ranking List". Sierra Club. 2014. Archived from the original on August 12, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015.
^ Meghan Chapple (July 9, 2014). "George Washington University plans bright future with solar energy". GreenBiz. Archived from the original on July 25, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014.
^ "Sustainability". Archived from the original on May 25, 2009. Retrieved June 8, 2009.
^ "The College Sustainability Report Card". Archived from the original on April 5, 2009. Retrieved June 8, 2009.
^ Anapol, Avery (March 3, 2016). "Officials reject fossil fuel divestment". GW Hatchet. Retrieved May 12, 2020.
^ Maise, Emily (August 2020). "GW to cut seven teams following 2020-21 season amid financial stress, pandemic". GW Hatchet.
^ "Streaking Colonials seek 11th straight win, host Dayton - NCAA Basketball - Yahoo! Sports". Sports.yahoo.com. February 7, 2006. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ [1] Archived May 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
^ Mike Rapp (March 15, 2007). "VandySports.com - Game Day Report: Vanderbilt vs. George Washington". Vanderbilt.rivals.com. Archived from the original on March 13, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "Fox Sports on MSN - College Basketball - Recap". Msn.foxsports.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "Scenes from the District". Sports Illustrated. February 14, 2006. Archived from the original on February 5, 2010. Retrieved May 3, 2010.
^ Andy Katz (March 17, 2006). "George Washington's overtime win icing on the cake". ESPON.com. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "George Washington Men's Basketball". Gwsports.cstv.com. February 26, 2011. Archived from the original on February 28, 2009. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "Karl Hobbs Selected as Assistant Coach for USA Basketball :: Colonials' Coach To Join DePaul's Wainwright, Drexel's Flint". Cstv.com. Archived from the original on September 12, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ "Notes, Quotes". USA Today. November 25, 2003. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 3, 2010.
^ a b "George Washington Athletics Official Athletic Site". gwsports.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ 2013 14 George Washington Colonials men's basketball team
^ a b "George Washington Athletics Official Athletic Site". gwsports.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ 2014 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament
^ "George Washington Athletics Official Athletic Site". gwsports.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ Kilgore, Adam (September 17, 2016). "Mike Lonergan is out as GW basketball coach after investigation into verbal abuse". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017.
^ Wang, Gene (March 27, 2017). "GW names Maurice Joseph full-time men's basketball coach". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017.
^ "Coming off the bench, a basketball ambassador", New York Times
^ "A New Era in GW Men's Basketball Begins". George Washington University Athletics.
^ Holt, David. "When we played football: the GW boys of fall, 1890-1966". The GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "George Washington Athletics Official Athletic Site". Archived from the original on April 23, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015.
^ "GW Spirit Program". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on July 30, 2007. Retrieved October 26, 2007.
^ T.J. Doyle (April 14, 2012). "PHOTO: GW George Wins 2012 NCA/NDA National Collegiate Mascot Competition - Half Smokes - SB Nation DC". Dc.sbnation.com. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ [2] Archived August 1, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
^ "GW Spirit Programs". The George Washington University. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved February 23, 2008.
^ "A closer look: "Hail to the Buff and Blue"". The GW Hatchet. October 3, 2003. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved November 30, 2009.
^ The George Washington University. "Club and Intramural Sports | Club & Intramural Sports | GW Athletics | Explore | The George Washington University". Gwu.edu. Archived from the original on August 30, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ Morella, Michael (August 16, 2010). "Top 10 Colleges for Members of College". U.S. News World & Report.
External links[edit]
George Washington University  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Official website 
GW Athletics website
vteThe George Washington UniversityColleges and schools
College of Professional Studies
Columbian College of Arts and Sciences
Corcoran School of the Arts and Design
Elliott School of International Affairs
Graduate School of Education & Human Development
Graduate School of Political Management
Law School
School of Business
School of Engineering and Applied Science
School of Media and Public Affairs
Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public Administration
Publications
Anthropological Quarterly
Law Review
Federal Circuit Bar Journal
Public Contract Law Journal
International Law Review
AIPLA Quarterly Journal
The Federal Communications Law Journal
The Washington Quarterly
Women's Health Issues
Planet Forward
Centersand institutes
List of centers and research institutes at George Washington University
National Security Archive
Textile Museum (Washington, D.C.)
Institute for International Economic Policy
Munich Intellectual Property Law Center
Athletics
George Washington Colonials
Men's basketball
Women's basketball
Men's baseball
Men's soccer
Charles E. Smith Center
Tucker Field
"Hail to the Buff and Blue"
Football (defunct)
Campuses
Campuses
Foggy Bottom (main campus)
Virginia Science & Technology Campus
Mount Vernon Campus
Buildingsand places
2000 Pennsylvania Avenue
Anniversary Park
University Art Galleries
Corcoran Gallery of Art
Corcoran Hall
John J. Earley Office and Studio
Engine Company 23
F Street House
Foggy Bottom GWU station
Fulbright Hall
Fairbanks' George Washington
Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis Hall
Lisner Auditorium
Madison Hall
Munson Hall
President's Office
Rawlins Park
Residence halls
River Horse
School Without Walls (Washington, D.C.)
Charles E. Smith Center
Snows Court (Washington, D.C.)
Stockton Hall
Hattie M. Strong Residence Hall
Oscar W. Underwood House
Washington Circle
Margaret Wetzel House
Maxwell Woodhull House
Student life
GW-TV
WRGW
Student Association
The GW Hatchet
Enosinian Society
The Taylor Prize in Mathematics
 
Libraries
Gelman Library
Jacob Burns Law Library
Himmelfarb Health Sciences Library
People
President of the University (Thomas LeBlanc)
Notable Alumni & Notable Faculty (Law School Alumni   Elliott School Alumni & Faculty   Columbian College Alumni & Faculty   GW Business School Alumni & Faculty)
Medicineand health
Medical Faculty Associates
George Washington University Hospital
School of Medicine and Health Sciences
School of Nursing
Milken Institute School of Public Health
Dr. Cyrus and Myrtle Katzen Cancer Research Center
See also
TechCast Project
Benjamin Franklin University
Mount Vernon College for Women
National University School of Law
Links to related articles
vtePresident of the George Washington University
Staughton (1821 1827)
Chapin (1828 1841)
Bacon (1843 1854)
Binney (1855 1858)
Samson (1859 1871)
Welling (1871 1894) 
Whitman (1895 1900)
Needham (1902 1910)
Stockton (1910 1918)
Collier (1918 1921)
Lewis (1923 1927)
Marvin (1927 1959)
Carroll (1961 1964)
Elliott (1965 1988)
Trachtenberg (1988 2007)
Knapp (2007 2017) 
LeBlanc (2017-2021)
Wrighton (2022-present)
Granberg (July 1, 2023 onwards)
vteColleges and universities in the District of ColumbiaResearch universities
American
Catholic
George Washington
Georgetown
Howard
Master s colleges and universities
Gallaudet
Trinity
UDC (UDC-CC)
Strayer University
Specialized colleges
Dominican House
Graduate School USA
Human Resources University
Institute of World Politics
SAIS
National Defense
National Intelligence
Quantic
Wesley Theological Seminary
Former institutions
Benjamin Franklin University
Corcoran
Mount Vernon College for Women
National University
Normal School for Colored Girls
Southeastern University
Washington Theological Union
vteGeorge Washington
1st President of the United States (1789 1797)
Senior Officer of the Army (1798 1799)
Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army (1775 1783)
Delegate to the Second Continental Congress (1775)
Delegate to the First Continental Congress (1774)
Military careerRevolutionary War
Military career
French and Indian War
Jumonville Glen
Battle of Fort Necessity
Battle of the Monongahela
Forbes Expedition
Washington in the American Revolution
Commander-in-chief, Continental Army
Aides-de-camp
Washington's headquarters
office and sleeping tent
Boston campaign
Siege of Boston
New York and New Jersey campaign
Delaware River crossing
Battle of Trenton
Battle of the Assunpink Creek
Battle of Princeton
Philadelphia campaign
Battle of Brandywine
Battle of Germantown
Battle of White Marsh
Valley Forge
Battle of Monmouth
Battles of Saratoga
Sullivan Expedition
Yorktown campaign
Siege of Yorktown
Culper Spy Ring
Newburgh Conspiracy
Newburgh letter
Asgill Affair
Resignation as commander-in-chief
Badge of Military Merit
Purple Heart
Washington Before Boston Medal
Horses: Nelson and Blueskin
Other U.S.founding events
Initiated, co-wrote, 1769 Virginia Association
Initiated, 1774 Fairfax Resolves
Continental Association
Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture
1785 Mount Vernon Conference
Chairman, 1787 Constitutional Convention
George Washington's political evolution
Presidency
1788 89 United States presidential election
First inauguration
inaugural bible
1792 presidential election
Second inauguration
Reception at Trenton
Title of "Mr. President"
Cabinet of the United States
Secretary of State
Attorney General
Secretary of the Treasury
Secretary of War
Judiciary Act of 1789
Nonintercourse Act
Whiskey Rebellion
Militia Acts of 1792
Coinage Act of 1792
United States Mint
United States Capitol cornerstone laying
Proclamation of Neutrality
Neutrality Act of 1794
Jay Treaty
Pinckney's Treaty
Slave Trade Act of 1794
Residence Act
Thanksgiving Proclamation
Farewell Address
State of the Union Address 1790
1791
1792
1793
1796
Cabinet
Federal judicial appointments
John Rutledge Supreme Court nominations
Views andpublic image
Presidential library
The Washington Papers
Religious views
Washington and slavery
Town Destroyer
Legacy
Life and homes
Early life
Birthplace
Ferry Farm boyhood home
Mount Vernon
Gristmill
Woodlawn Plantation
Longfellow House Washington's Headquarters National Historic Site
Hasbrouck House
First Presidential Mansion
Second Presidential Mansion
President's House, Philadelphia
Germantown White House
Custis estate
Potomac Company
James River and Kanawha Canal
Mountain Road Lottery
Congressional Gold Medal
Thanks of Congress
President General of the Society of the Cincinnati
Washington College
Washington and Lee University
Electoral history of George Washington
Memorialsand depictions
Washington, D.C.
Washington state
Washington Monument
Mount Rushmore
Washington's Birthday
Purple Heart
The Apotheosis of Washington
George Washington (Houdon)
plaster copy
George Washington (Ceracchi)
George Washington (Canova)
George Washington (Greenough)
George Washington (Trumbull)
George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door
Revolutionary War Door
Washington Crossing the Delaware
The Passage of the Delaware
General George Washington at Trenton
Washington at Verplanck's Point
General George Washington Resigning His Commission
Surrender of Lord Cornwallis
Unfinished portrait
Lansdowne portrait
The Washington Family portrait
Washington at Princeton paintings
George Washington Taking the Salute at Trenton
Reception at Trenton painting
Statues
Princeton Battle Monument
Point of View sculpture
George Washington on Horseback
Austin statue
Baltimore statue
Boston statue
Morristown statue
Newark statue
Philadelphia statue
Portland statue
Washington, D.C. statue
West Point monument
Mexico City statue
George Washington University
Washington University in St. Louis
Washington Masonic National Memorial
George Washington Memorial Parkway
George Washington Bridge
Washington and Jefferson National Forests
Washington Monument, Baltimore
Washington Square Park
Arch
U.S. Postage stamps
Washington-Franklin Issues
1932 bicentennial
Currency
Washington quarter
50 State Quarters
D.C. and territories quarters
America the Beautiful quarters
American Women quarters
Washington dollar
Lafayette dollar
Silver bullion coins
Washington nickel
250th Anniversary half dollar
Mount Washington
Cultural depictions
George Washington (1984 miniseries
1986 sequel)
A More Perfect Union (1989 film)
The Crossing (2000 film)
We Fight to Be Free (2006 film)
Turn: Washington's Spies (2014 2017 series)
The War that Made America (2006 miniseries)
Washington (2020 miniseries)
Hamilton (film)
Related
Bibliography
List of articles
Founders Online
Founding Fathers of the United States
Republicanism
Federalist Party
Federalist Era
Virginia dynasty
Coat of arms
Cherry-tree anecdote
River Farm
Washington's Crossing
Washington Rochambeau Revolutionary Route
1751 Barbados trip
Category
Syng inkstand
General of the Armies
Conway Cabal
American Foxhound
American Philosophical Society
American Revolution
patriots
Betsy Ross flag
Mount Vernon Ladies' Association
Mount Vernon replicas
George Washington Memorial Building
Attempted theft of Washington's skull
Ancestryand family
Martha Washington (wife)
John Parke Custis (stepson)
George Washington Parke Custis (step-grandson, adopted son)
Eleanor Parke Custis (step-granddaughter, adopted daughter)
Augustine Washington (father)
Mary Ball Washington (mother)
Lawrence Washington (half-brother)
Augustine Washington Jr. (half-brother)
Betty Washington Lewis (sister)
Samuel Washington (brother)
John A. Washington (brother)
Charles Washington (brother)
Lawrence Washington (grandfather)
John Washington (great-grandfather)
George Reade (2nd great-grandfather)
Bushrod Washington (nephew)
John Adams  
 Category
vteSoutheastern Universities Research AssociationStandard members
Alabama
UAB
UAHuntsville
Arkansas
Auburn
Baylor
Catholic
UCF
Christopher Newport
Clemson
Delaware
Duke
East Carolina
Florida
Florida Atlantic
Florida Tech
FIU
Florida State
George Mason
George Washington
Georgetown
Georgia
Georgia Tech
Georgia State
Hampton
Houston
James Madison
Kentucky
UL Lafayette
LSU
Louisiana Tech
Maryland
UMBC
MIT
Memphis
Miami
Ole Miss
Mississippi State
New Orleans
Norfolk State
North Carolina A&T
North Carolina
NC State
Oklahoma
Old Dominion
Regina
Rice
Richmond
South Carolina
South Florida
Southern Miss
Tennessee
Texas
Texas A&M
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Virginia
VCU
Virginia Tech
Virginia State
West Virginia
William & Mary
Affiliate members
Idaho State
Ohio
vteAtlantic 10 ConferenceCurrent full members
Davidson Wildcats
Dayton Flyers
Duquesne Dukes (non-baseball member)
Fordham Rams
George Mason Patriots
George Washington Colonials
La Salle Explorers (non-baseball member)
Loyola Chicago Ramblers (non-baseball member)
UMass Minutemen & Minutewomen
Rhode Island Rams
Richmond Spiders
St. Bonaventure Bonnies
Saint Joseph's Hawks
Saint Louis Billikens
VCU Rams
Field hockey members
Lock Haven Bald Eagles
Saint Francis Red Flash
Men's lacrosse members
High Point Panthers
Hobart Statesmen
Former full members
Butler Bulldogs
Charlotte 49ers
Penn State Nittany Lions
Pittsburgh Panthers
Rutgers Scarlet Knights
Temple Owls
Villanova Wildcats
Virginia Tech Hokies
West Virginia Mountaineers
Xavier Musketeers
Former associate member
West Chester Golden Rams (field hockey)
Former football-only members
Boston University Terriers
UConn Huskies
Delaware Fightin' Blue Hens
Hofstra Pride
James Madison Dukes
Maine Black Bears
UNH Wildcats
Northeastern Huskies
Towson Tigers
Villanova Wildcats
William & Mary Tribe
Sports
Football
Men's basketball (seasons, tournaments)
Women's basketball
Baseball
vteEast Atlantic Gymnastics League
George Washington Colonials
LIU Sharks
New Hampshire Wildcats
North Carolina Tar Heels
NC State Wolfpack
Pittsburgh Panthers
Towson Tigers
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Geographic
MusicBrainz place
Artists
Te Papa (New Zealand)
People
Trove
Other
IdRef
38 54 03 N 77 03 03 W  /  38.9007 N 77.0508 W  / 38.9007; -77.0508Coordinates: 38 54 03 N 77 03 03 W  /  38.9007 N 77.0508 W  / 38.9007; -77.0508
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Washington_University&oldid=1149565308"