Device for measuring a physical quantity
 A measuring instrument for lengths: a typical tape measure with both metric and imperial units and two US pennies for comparison
 A measuring instrument for radio waves: the 64-meter radio telescope at Parkes Observatory, Australia, as seen in 1969, when it was used to receive live televised video from Apollo 11
A measuring instrument is a device to measure a physical quantity. In the physical sciences, quality assurance, and engineering, measurement is the activity of obtaining and comparing physical quantities of real-world objects and events. Established standard objects and events are used as units, and the process of measurement gives a number relating the item under study and the referenced unit of measurement. Measuring instruments, and formal test methods which define the instrument's use, are the means by which these relations of numbers are obtained. All measuring instruments are subject to varying degrees of instrument error and measurement uncertainty.
These instruments may range from simple objects such as rulers and stopwatches to electron microscopes and particle accelerators. Virtual instrumentation is widely used in the development of modern measuring instruments.
Time[edit]
 Watch, a time measurement device
Main article: Time
In the past, a common time measuring instrument was the sundial. Today, the usual measuring instruments for time are clocks and watches. For highly accurate measurement of time an atomic clock is used.
Stopwatches are also used to measure time in some sports.
Energy[edit]
 Measuring instruments in fiction: Captain Nemo and Professor Aronnax contemplating thermometers, barometers, clocks, etc. in Jules Verne's 1869-1870 science fiction novel Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea
 Fun measuring instruments: a Love Meter and strength tester machine at a Framingham, Massachusetts rest stop.
Main article: Energy
Energy is measured by an energy meter. Examples of energy meters include:
Electricity meter[edit]
An electricity meter measures energy directly in kilowatt-hours.
Gas meter[edit]
A gas meter measures energy indirectly by recording the volume of gas used. This figure can then be converted to a measure of energy by multiplying it by the calorific value of the gas.
Power (flux of energy)[edit]
Main article: Power (physics)
A physical system that exchanges energy may be described by the amount of energy exchanged per time-interval, also called power or flux of energy.
(see any measurement device for power below)
For the ranges of power-values see: Orders of magnitude (power).
Action[edit]
Main article: Action (physics)
Action describes energy summed up over the time a process lasts (time integral over energy). Its dimension is the same as that of an angular momentum.
A phototube provides a voltage measurement which permits the calculation of the quantized action (Planck constant) of light.  (See also Photoelectric effect.)
Geometry[edit]
Main category: Geometric measuring instruments
Dimensions (size)[edit]
Main category: Dimensional instruments
Length (distance)[edit]
Length, distance, or range meter
For the ranges of length-values see: Orders of magnitude (length)
Area[edit]
Planimeter
For the ranges of area-values see: Orders of magnitude (area)
Volume[edit]
 A measuring cup, a common instrument used to measure volume.
Buoyant weight (solids)
Eudiometer, pneumatic trough (gases)
Flow measurement devices (liquids)
Graduated cylinder (liquids)
Measuring cup (grained solids, liquids)
Overflow trough (solids)
Pipette (liquids)
If the mass density of a solid is known, weighing allows to calculate the volume.
For the ranges of volume-values see: Orders of magnitude (volume)
Angle[edit]
Main category: Angle measuring instruments
Circumferentor
Cross staff
Goniometer
Graphometer
Inclinometer
Mural instrument
Protractor
Quadrant
Reflecting instruments
Octant
Reflecting circles
Sextant
Theodolite and total station
Orientation in three-dimensional space[edit]
See also the section about navigation below.
Level[edit]
Main article: Level sensor
Level (instrument)
Laser line level
Spirit level
Direction[edit]
Gyroscope
Mechanics[edit]
This includes basic quantities found in classical- and continuum mechanics; but strives to exclude temperature-related questions or quantities.
Mass- or volume flow measurement[edit]
Gas meter
Mass flow meter
Metering pump
Water meter
Speed or velocity (flux of length)[edit]
Airspeed indicator
LIDAR speed gun
Radar speed gun, a Doppler radar device, using the Doppler effect for indirect measurement of velocity.
Speedometer
Tachometer (speed of rotation)
Tachymeter
Variometer (rate of climb or descent)
Velocimetry (measurement of fluid velocity)
For the ranges of speed-values see: Orders of magnitude (speed)
Acceleration[edit]
Accelerometer
Mass[edit]
 A pair of scales: An instrument for measuring mass in a force field by balancing forces.
Balance
Check weigher measures precise weight of items in a conveyor line, rejecting underweight or overweight objects.
Inertial balance
Katharometer
Mass spectrometers measure the mass-to-charge ratio, not the mass, of ionised particles.
Weighing scale
For the ranges of mass-values see: Orders of magnitude (mass)
Linear momentum[edit]
Ballistic pendulum
Force (flux of linear momentum)[edit]
Force gauge
Spring scale
Strain gauge
Torsion balance
Tribometer
 Measuring absolute pressure in an accelerated reference frame: The principle of a mercury (Hg) barometer in the gravitational field of the earth.
Pressure (flux density of linear momentum)[edit]
Anemometer (measures wind speed)
Barometer used to measure the atmospheric pressure.
Manometer (see Pressure measurement and Pressure sensor)
Pitot tube (measures airspeed)
Tire-pressure gauge in industry and mobility
For the ranges of pressure-values see: Orders of magnitude (pressure)
See also: Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
Angular velocity or rotations per time unit[edit]
Stroboscope
Tachometer
For the value-ranges of angular velocity see: Orders of magnitude (angular velocity)
For the ranges of frequency see: Orders of magnitude (frequency)
Torque[edit]
Dynamometer
Prony brake
Torque wrench
Energy carried by mechanical quantities, mechanical work[edit]
Ballistic pendulum, indirectly by calculation and or gauging
Electricity, electronics, and electrical engineering[edit]
See also: Electrical measurements and List of electrical and electronic measuring equipment
Considerations related to electric charge dominate electricity and electronics.
Electrical charges interact via a field. That field is called electric field.If the charge doesn't move. If the charge moves, thus realizing an electric current, especially in an electrically neutral conductor, that field is called magnetic.
Electricity can be given a quality   a potential. And electricity has a substance-like property, the electric charge.
Energy (or power) in elementary electrodynamics is calculated by multiplying the potential by the amount of charge (or current) found at that potential: potential times charge (or current). (See Classical electromagnetism and Covariant formulation of classical electromagnetism)
 An instrument for detecting net charges, the electroscope.
Electric charge[edit]
Electrometer is often used to reconfirm the phenomenon of contact electricity leading to triboelectric sequences.
Torsion balance used by Coulomb to establish a relation between charges and force, see above.
For the ranges of charge values see: Orders of magnitude (charge)
Electric current (current of charge)[edit]
Ammeter
Clamp meter
d'Arsonval galvanometer
Galvanometer
Voltage (electric potential difference)[edit]
Oscilloscope allows quantifying time-dependent voltages
Voltmeter
Electric resistance, electrical conductance, and electrical conductivity[edit]
Ohmmeter
Time-domain reflectometer characterizes and locates faults in metallic cables by runtime measurements of electric signals.
Wheatstone bridge
Electric capacitance[edit]
Capacitance meter
Electric inductance[edit]
Inductance meter
Energy carried by electricity or electric energy[edit]
Electricity meter
Power carried by electricity (current of energy)[edit]
Wattmeter
Electric field (negative gradient of electric potential, voltage per length)[edit]
Field mill
Magnetic field[edit]
See also the relevant section in the article about the magnetic field.
Compass
Hall effect sensor
Magnetometer
Proton magnetometer
SQUID
For the ranges of magnetic field see: Orders of magnitude (magnetic field)
Combination instruments[edit]
Multimeter, combines the functions of ammeter, voltmeter, and ohmmeter as a minimum.
LCR meter, combines the functions of ohmmeter, capacitance meter, and inductance meter.  Also called component bridge due to the bridge circuit method of measurement.
Thermodynamics[edit]
Temperature-related considerations dominate thermodynamics. There are two distinct thermal properties: A thermal potential   the temperature. For example: A glowing coal has a different thermal quality than a non-glowing one.
And a substance-like property,   the entropy; for example: One glowing coal won't heat a pot of water, but a hundred will.
Energy in thermodynamics is calculated by multiplying the thermal potential by the amount of entropy found at that potential:  temperature times entropy.
Entropy can be created by friction but not annihilated.
Amount of substance (or mole number)[edit]
A physical quantity introduced in chemistry; usually determined indirectly. If mass and substance type of the sample are known, then atomic- or molecular masses (taken from a periodic table, masses measured by mass spectrometry) give direct access to the value of the amount of substance. (See also Molar mass.)  If specific molar values are given, then the amount of substance of a given sample may be determined by measuring volume, mass, or concentration. See also the subsection below about the measurement of the boiling point.
Gas collecting tube gases
Temperature[edit]
Electromagnetic spectroscopy
Galileo thermometer
Gas thermometer principle: relation between temperature and volume or pressure of a gas (gas laws).
Constant pressure gas thermometer
Constant volume gas thermometer
Liquid crystal thermometer
Liquid thermometer principle: relation between temperature and volume of a liquid (coefficient of thermal expansion).
Alcohol thermometer
Mercury-in-glass thermometer
Pyranometer principle: solar radiation flux density relates to surface temperature (Stefan Boltzmann law)
Pyrometers principle:  temperature dependence of spectral intensity of light (Planck's law), i.e. the color of the light relates to the temperature of its source, range: from about  50 C to +4000 C, note: measurement of thermal radiation (instead of thermal conduction, or thermal convection) means: no physical contact becomes necessary in temperature measurement (pyrometry). Also note: thermal space resolution (images) found in thermography.
Resistance thermometer principle: relation between temperature and electrical resistance of metals (platinum) (electrical resistance), range: 10 to 1,000 kelvins, application in physics and industry
Solid thermometer principle: relation between temperature and length of a solid (coefficient of thermal expansion).
Bimetallic strip
Thermistors principle: relation between temperature and electrical resistance of ceramics or polymers, range: from about 0.01 to 2,000 kelvins ( 273.14 to 1,700 C)
Thermocouples principle: relation between temperature and voltage of metal junctions (Seebeck effect), range: from about  200 C to +1350 C
Thermometer
Thermopile is a set of connected thermocouples
Triple point cell used for calibrating thermometers.
Imaging technology[edit]
Thermographic camera uses a microbolometer for detection of heat radiation.
See also Temperature measurement and Category:Thermometers. More technically related may be seen thermal analysis methods in materials science.
For the ranges of temperature-values see: Orders of magnitude (temperature)
Energy carried by entropy or thermal energy[edit]
 An active calorimeter lacking a temperature measurement device.
This includes thermal mass or temperature coefficient of energy, reaction energy, heat flow, ...
Calorimeters are called passive if gauged to measure emerging energy carried by entropy, for example from chemical reactions. Calorimeters are called active or heated if they heat the sample, or reformulated: if they are gauged to fill the sample with a defined amount of entropy.
Actinometer heating power of radiation.
Constant-temperature calorimeter, phase change calorimeter for example an ice calorimeter or any other calorimeter observing a phase change or using a gauged phase change for heat measurement.
Constant-volume calorimeter, also called bomb calorimeter
Constant-pressure calorimeter, enthalpy-meter, or coffee cup calorimeter
Differential Scanning Calorimeter
Reaction calorimeter
See also Calorimeter or Calorimetry
Entropy[edit]
Entropy is accessible indirectly by measurement of energy and temperature.
Entropy transfer[edit]
Phase change calorimeter's energy value divided by absolute temperature give the entropy exchanged. Phase changes produce no entropy and therefore offer themselves as an entropy measurement concept. Thus entropy values occur indirectly by processing energy measurements at defined temperatures, without producing entropy.
Constant-temperature calorimeter, phase change calorimeter
Heat flux sensor uses thermopiles (which are connected thermocouples) to determine current density or flux of entropy.
Entropy content[edit]
The given sample is cooled down to (almost) absolute zero (for example by submerging the sample in liquid helium). At absolute zero temperature any sample is assumed to contain no entropy (see Third law of thermodynamics for further information). Then the following two active calorimeter types can be used to fill the sample with entropy until the desired temperature has been reached: (see also Thermodynamic databases for pure substances)
Constant-pressure calorimeter, enthalpy-meter, active
Constant-temperature calorimeter, phase change calorimeter, active
Entropy production[edit]
Processes transferring energy from a non-thermal carrier to heat as a carrier do produce entropy (Example: mechanical/electrical friction, established by Count Rumford).
Either the produced entropy or heat are measured (calorimetry) or the transferred energy of the non-thermal carrier may be measured.
calorimeter
(any device for measuring the work which will or would eventually be converted to heat and the ambient temperature)
Entropy lowering its temperature without losing energy produces entropy (Example: Heat conduction in an isolated rod; "thermal friction").
calorimeter
Temperature coefficient of energy or "heat capacity"[edit]
Concerning a given sample, a proportionality factor relating temperature change and energy carried by heat. If the sample is a gas, then this coefficient depends significantly on being measured at constant volume or at constant pressure. (The terminology preference in the heading indicates that the classical use of heat bars it from having substance-like properties.)
Constant-volume calorimeter, bomb calorimeter
Constant-pressure calorimeter, enthalpy-meter
Specific temperature coefficient of energy or "specific heat capacity"[edit]
The temperature coefficient of energy divided by a substance-like quantity (amount of substance, mass, volume) describing the sample. Usually calculated from measurements by a division or could be measured directly using a unit amount of that sample.
For the ranges of specific heat capacities see: Orders of magnitude (specific heat capacity)
Coefficient of thermal expansion[edit]
Dilatometer
Strain gauge
Melting temperature (of a solid)[edit]
Differential Scanning Calorimeter gives melting point and enthalpy of fusion.
Kofler bench
Thiele tube
Boiling temperature (of a liquid)[edit]
Ebullioscope a device for measuring the boiling point of a liquid. This device is also part of a method that uses the effect of boiling point elevation for calculating the molecular mass of a solvent.
See also Thermal analysis, Heat.
More on continuum mechanics[edit]
This includes mostly instruments which measure macroscopic properties of matter: In the fields of solid-state physics; in condensed matter physics which considers solids, liquids, and in-betweens exhibiting for example viscoelastic behavior. Furthermore, fluid mechanics, where liquids, gases, plasmas, and in-betweens like supercritical fluids are studied.
Density[edit]
This refers to particle density of fluids and compact(ed) solids like crystals, in contrast to bulk density of grainy or porous solids.
Aerometer liquids
Dasymeter gases
Gas collecting tube gases
Hydrometer liquids
Pycnometer liquids
Resonant frequency and damping analyser (RFDA) solids
For the ranges of density-values see: Orders of magnitude (density)
Hardness of a solid[edit]
Durometer
Shape and surface of a solid[edit]
Holographic interferometer
Laser produced speckle pattern analysed.
Resonant frequency and damping analyser (RFDA)
Tribometer
Deformation of condensed matter[edit]
Strain gauge all below
Elasticity of a solid (elastic moduli)[edit]
Resonant frequency and damping analyser (RFDA), using the impulse excitation technique: A small mechanical impulse causes the sample to vibrate. The vibration depends on elastic properties, density, geometry, and inner structures (lattice or fissures).
Plasticity of a solid[edit]
Cam plastometer
Plastometer
 Measurement results (a) brittle (b) ductile with breaking point (c) ductile without breaking point.
Tensile strength, ductility, or malleability of a solid[edit]
Universal testing machine
Granularity of a solid or of a suspension[edit]
Grindometer
Viscosity of a fluid[edit]
Rheometer
Viscometer
Optical activity[edit]
Polarimeter
Surface tension of liquids[edit]
Tensiometer
Imaging technology[edit]
Tomograph, device and method for non-destructive analysis of multiple measurements done on a geometric object, for producing 2- or 3-dimensional images, representing the inner structure of that geometric object.
Wind tunnel
This section and the following sections include instruments from the wide field of Category:Materials science, materials science.
More on electric properties of condensed matter, gas[edit]
 The electrochemical cell: A device for measuring substance potentials.
Permittivity, relative static permittivity, (dielectric constant), or electric susceptibility[edit]
Capacitor
Such measurements also allow to access values of molecular dipoles.
Magnetic susceptibility or magnetization[edit]
Gouy balance
For other methods see the section in the article about magnetic susceptibility.
See also Category:Electric and magnetic fields in matter
Substance potential or chemical potential or molar Gibbs energy[edit]
Phase conversions like changes of aggregate state, chemical reactions or nuclear reactions transmuting substances, from reactants into products, or diffusion through membranes have an overall energy balance. Especially at constant pressure and constant temperature, molar energy balances define the notion of a substance potential or chemical potential or molar Gibbs energy, which gives the energetic information about whether the process is possible or not - in a closed system.
Energy balances that include entropy consist of two parts: A balance that accounts for the changed entropy content of the substances, and another one that accounts for the energy freed or taken by that reaction itself, the Gibbs energy change.  The sum of reaction energy and energy associated to the change of entropy content is also called enthalpy. Often the whole enthalpy is carried by entropy and thus measurable calorimetrically.
For standard conditions in chemical reactions either molar entropy content and molar Gibbs energy with respect to some chosen zero point are tabulated. Or molar entropy content and molar enthalpy with respect to some chosen zero are tabulated. (See Standard enthalpy change of formation and Standard molar entropy)
The substance potential of a redox reaction is usually determined electrochemically current-free using reversible cells.
Redox electrode
Other values may be determined indirectly by calorimetry. Also by analyzing phase-diagrams.
See also: Electrochemistry
Sub-microstructural properties of condensed matter, gas[edit]
Infrared spectroscopy
Neutron detector
Radio frequency spectrometers for nuclear magnetic resonance and electron paramagnetic resonance
Raman spectroscopy
Crystal structure[edit]
An X-ray tube, a sample scattering the X-rays and a photographic plate to detect them.  This constellation forms the scattering instrument used by X-ray crystallography for investigating crystal structures of samples. Amorphous solids lack a distinct pattern and are identifiable thereby.
Imaging technology, microscope[edit]
Electron microscope
Scanning electron microscope
Transmission electron microscope
Optical microscope uses reflectiveness or refractiveness of light to produce an image.
Scanning acoustic microscope
Scanning probe microscope
Atomic force microscope (AFM)
Scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
Focus variation
X-ray microscope
(See also Spectroscopy and List of materials analysis methods.)
Rays ("waves" and "particles")[edit]
Sound, compression waves in matter[edit]
Microphones in general, sometimes their sensitivity is increased by the reflection- and concentration principle realized in acoustic mirrors.
Laser microphone
Seismometer
Sound pressure[edit]
Microphone or hydrophone properly gauged
Shock tube
Sound level meter
 A device for unmixing sun-light: the prism.
 The electromagnetic spectrum
Light and radiation without a rest mass, non-ionizing[edit]
Antenna (radio)
Bolometer measuring the energy of incident electromagnetic radiation.
Camera
EMF meter
Interferometer used in the wide field of interferometry
Microwave power meter
Optical power meter
Photographic plate
Photomultiplier
Phototube
Radio telescope
Spectrometer
T-ray detectors
(for lux meter, see the section about human senses and human body)
See also Category:Optical devices
Photon polarization[edit]
Polarizer
Pressure (current density of linear momentum)[edit]
Nichols radiometer
Radiant flux[edit]
The measure of the total power of light emitted.
Integrating sphere for measuring the total radiant flux of a light source
 A Cathode-ray tube
Radiation with a rest mass, particle radiation[edit]
Cathode rays[edit]
Crookes tube
Cathode-ray tube, a phosphor-coated anode
Atom polarization and electron polarization[edit]
Stern Gerlach experiment
 Another visualization of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Ionizing radiation[edit]
Ionizing radiation includes rays of "particles" as well as rays of "waves". Especially X-rays and gamma rays transfer enough energy in non-thermal, (single-) collision processes to separate electron(s) from an atom.
 A cloud chamber detecting alpha-rays.
Particle and ray flux[edit]
Bubble chamber
Cloud chamber
Dosimeter, a technical device realizes different working principles.
Geiger counter
Ionisation chamber
Microchannel plate detector
Photographic plate
Photostimulable phosphor plate
Proportional counter
Scintillation counter, Lucas cell
Semiconductor detector
Identification and content[edit]
This could include chemical substances, rays of any kind, elementary particles, and quasiparticles. Many measurement devices outside this section may be used or at least become part of an identification process.
For identification and content concerning chemical substances, see also Analytical chemistry, List of chemical analysis methods, and List of materials analysis methods.
Substance content in mixtures, substance identification[edit]
Carbon dioxide sensor
chromatographic device, gas chromatograph separates mixtures of substances. Different velocities of the substance types accomplish the separation.
Colorimeter absorbance, and thus concentration
Gas detector
Gas detector in combination with mass spectrometer,
mass spectrometer identifies the chemical composition of a sample on the basis of the mass-to-charge ratio of charged particles.
Nephelometer or turbidimeter
Oxygen sensor (= lambda sond)
Refractometer, indirectly by determining the refractive index of a substance.
Smoke detector
Ultracentrifuge, separates mixtures of substances. In a force field of a centrifuge, substances of different densities separate.
pH: Concentration of protons in a solution[edit]
pH meter
Saturated calomel electrode
Humidity[edit]
Hygrometer the density of water in air
Lysimeter the balance of water in soil
Human senses and human body[edit]
This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: non-standard section titles. Please help improve this section if you can. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Vitruvian Man by Leonardo da Vinci, Gallerie dell'Accademia, Venice (1485-90)
Sight[edit]
Brightness: photometry[edit]
Photometry is the measurement of light in terms of its perceived brightness to the human eye. Photometric quantities derive from analogous radiometric quantities by weighting the contribution of each wavelength by a luminosity function that models the eye's spectral sensitivity. For the ranges of possible values, see the orders of magnitude in:
illuminance,
luminance, and
luminous flux.
Photometers of various kinds:
Lux meter for measuring illuminance, i.e. incident luminous flux per unit area
Luminance meter for measuring luminance, i.e. luminous flux per unit area and unit solid angle
Light meter, an instrument used to set photographic exposures. It can be either a lux meter (incident-light meter) or a luminance meter (reflected-light meter), and is calibrated in photographic units.
Integrating sphere for collecting the total luminous flux of a light source, which can then be measured by a photometer
Densitometer for measuring the degree to which a photographic material reflects or transmits light
Color: colorimetry[edit]
Tristimulus colorimeter for quantifying colors and calibrating an imaging workflow
Radar brightness: radiometry[edit]
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) instruments measure radar brightness, Radar Cross Section (RCS), which is a function of the reflectivity and moisture of imaged objects at wavelengths which are too long to be perceived by the human eye. Black pixels mean no reflectivity (e.g. water surfaces), white pixels mean high reflectivity (e.g. urban areas). Colored pixels can be obtained by combining three gray-scaled images which usually interpret the polarization of electromagnetic waves. The combination R-G-B = HH-HV-VV combines radar images of waves sent and received horizontally (HH), sent horizontally and received vertically (HV) and sent and received vertically (VV). The calibration of such instruments is done by imaging objects (calibration targets) whose radar brightness is known.
Hearing[edit]
Loudness in phon[edit]
Headphone, loudspeaker, sound pressure gauge, for measuring an equal-loudness contour of a human ear.
Sound level meter calibrated to an equal-loudness contour of the human auditory system behind the human ear.
Smell[edit]
Olfactometer, see also Olfaction.
Temperature (sense and body)[edit]
Body temperature or core temperature[edit]
Medical thermometer, see also infrared thermometer
Circulatory system (mainly heart and blood vessels for distributing substances fast)[edit]
Blood-related parameters are listed in a blood test.
Electrocardiograph records the electrical activity of the heart
Glucose meter for obtaining the status of blood sugar.
Sphygmomanometer, a blood pressure meter used to determine blood pressure in medicine. See also Category:Blood tests
Respiratory system (lung and airways controlling the breathing process)[edit]
 A spirometer, inhaling into pipe a fills volume b, the rest balances forces.
Spirometer
Concentration or partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the respiratory gases[edit]
Capnograph
Nervous system (nerves transmitting and processing information electrically)[edit]
Electroencephalograph records the electrical activity of the brain
Musculoskeletal system (muscles and bones for movement)[edit]
power, work of muscles[edit]
Ergometer
metabolic system[edit]
Body fat meter
Medical imaging[edit]
 An echocardiogram processed into a three dimensional representation.
Computed tomography
Magnetic resonance imaging
Medical ultrasonography
Radiology
Tomograph, device and method for non-destructive analysis of multiple measurements done on a geometric object, for producing 2- or 3-dimensional images, representing the inner structure of that geometric object.
See also: Category:Physiological instruments and Category:Medical testing equipment.
Meteorology[edit]
See also Category:Meteorological instrumentation and equipment.
Navigation and surveying[edit]
See also Category:Navigational equipment and Category:Navigation.
See also Surveying instruments.
Astronomy[edit]
Radio antenna
Telescope
See also Astronomical instruments and Category:Astronomical observatories.
Military[edit]
Some instruments, such as telescopes and sea navigation instruments, have had military applications for many centuries. However, the role of instruments in military affairs rose exponentially with the development of technology via applied science, which began in the mid-19th century and has continued through the present day. Military instruments as a class draw on most of the categories of instrument described throughout this article, such as navigation, astronomy, optics, and imaging, and the kinetics of moving objects. Common abstract themes that unite military instruments are seeing into the distance, seeing in the dark, knowing an object's geographic location, and knowing and controlling a moving object's path and destination. Special features of these instruments may include ease of use, speed, reliability, and accuracy.
Uncategorized, specialized, or generalized application[edit]
Actograph measures and records animal activity within an experimental chamber.
Densitometer measures light transmission through processed photographic film or transparent material or light reflection from a reflective material.
Force platform measures ground reaction force.
Gauge (engineering) A highly precise measurement instrument, also usable to calibrate other instruments of the same kind. Often found in conjunction with defining or applying technical standards.
Gradiometer any device that measures spatial variations of a physical quantity. For example, as done in gravity gradiometry.
Parking meter measures time a vehicle is parked at a particular spot, usually with a fee.
Postage meter measures postage used from a prepaid account.
S meter measures the signal strength processed by a communications receiver.
Sensor, hypernym for devices that measure with little interaction, typically used in technical applications.
Spectroscope is an important tool used by physicists.
SWR meter check the quality of the match between the antenna and the transmission line.
Universal measuring machine measures geometric locations for inspecting tolerances.
Alphabetical listing[edit]
Instrument
Quantity measured
alcoholmeter
alcoholic strength of liquid
altimeter
altitude
ammeter
electric current
anemometer
windspeed
astrolabe
latitude and altitude of celestial bodies
audiometer
hearing
barkometer
tanning liquors used in tanning leather
barometer
air pressure
bettsometer
integrity of fabric coverings on aircraft
bevameter
mechanical properties of soil
bolometer
electromagnetic radiation
Brannock Device
measuring shoe size
breathalyzer
breath alcohol content
caliper
length
calorimeter
heat of chemical reactions
cathetometer
vertical distances
ceilometer
height of a cloud base
chronometer or clock
time
clap-o-meter
volume of applause
compass
direction of North
Coulombmeter
electrostatic charge of a material
colorimeter
color
creepmeter
slow surface displacement of an active geologic fault in the earth
corrator
corrosion rate
declinometer
magnetic declination
densimeter
specific gravity of liquids
densitometer
degree of darkness in photographic or semitransparent material
diffractometer
structure of crystals
dilatometer
volume changes caused by a physical or chemical process
disdrometer
size, speed, and velocity of raindrops
dosimeter
exposure to hazards, especially radiation; radiation of item
drumometer
amount of drum strokes over time
dumpy level
horizontal levels, polar angle
dynamometer
force, torque, or power
electricity meter
electrical energy used
electrometer
electric charge
electronic tuner
pitch of musical notes
ellipsometer
refractive index, dielectric function, thickness of thin films
eudiometer
change in volume of a gas mixture following combustion
evaporimeter
rate of evaporation
fathometer
ocean depth
feeler gauge
gap widths
forward looking infrared (FLIR)
detects infrared energy (heat)converts it into an electronic signal, which is then processed to produce a thermal image on a video monitor and perform temperature calculations.
framing square
right angles in construction
frequency counter
frequency of alternating current
fuel gauge
fuel levels
galvanometer
electricity
gas pycnometer
volume and density of solids
geiger counter
ionizing radiation (alpha, beta, gamma, etc.)
glucometer
blood glucose (diabetes)
graphometer
angle
heliometer
variation of the sun's diameter
hourmeter
elapsed machine hours
hydrometer
specific gravity of liquids (density of liquids)
hygrometer
humidity
inclinometer
angle of a slope
inkometer
ink
interferometer
wave interference
infrared thermometer
heat radiated
katharometer
composition of gases
lactometer
specific gravity of milk
light meter
light (in photography)
linear position transducer
speed of movement
load cell
measurement of force
lux meter
intensity of light
magnetometer
strength of magnetic fields
manometer
pressure of gas
mass flow meter
mass flow rate of a fluid travelling through a tube
mass spectrometer
masses of ions, used to identify chemical substances through their mass spectra
measuring cup
liquid and dry goods
measuring cylinder
volume
measuring spoon
a spoon used to measure an amount of an ingredient, either liquid or dry
megger
electrical insulation
mercury barometer
Atmospheric pressure
micrometer
small distances
multimeter
electrical potential, resistance, and current
nephoscope
to measure the speed and direction of clouds
nephelometer
particle in a liquid
odometer
distance travelled
ohmmeter
electrical resistance
opisometer
lengths of arbitrary curved lines
orchidometer
testicle size in male humans
oscilloscope
oscillations
osmometer
osmotic strength of a solution, colloid, or compound matter of an object
parking meter
collects moneys for vehicle parking rights in a zone for a limited time
pedometer
steps
pH meter
pH (chemical acidity/basicity of a solution)
photometer
illuminance or irradiance
planometer
area
polarimeter
rotation of polarized light
potentiometer
voltage (term is also used to refer to a variable resistor)
profilometer
surface roughness
protractor
angle
psychrometer
humidity
pycnometer
fluid density
pyranometer
solar radiation
pyrheliometer
direct solar insolation
pyrometer
high temperatures
quadrat
percentage cover of a certain species
quartz crystal microbalance
thickness of deposited thin films
rain gauge
measuring of rain
radiometer
radiant flux of electromagnetic radiation
refractometer
index of refraction
rheometer
response to applied forces
rotameter
pressure of a liquid or gas in a closed tube
ruler
for measuring length
saccharometer
amount of sugar in a solution
seismometer
seismic waves (for example, earthquakes)
sextant
location on earth's surface (used in naval navigation)
spectrometer
properties of light
spectrophotometer
intensity of light as a function of wavelength
speedometer
speed, velocity of a vehicle
spirometer
the lung capacity
spherometer
radius of a sphere
sphygmomanometer
blood pressure
stadimeter
object range
strainmeter
seismic strain
SWR meter
standing wave ratio
Synthetic Aperture Radar
reflectivity and moisture
tacheometer
distance
tachometer
revolutions per minute, rate of blood flow, speed of aeroplanes
taximeter
distance travelled, displacement
tensiometer
surface tension of a liquid
theodolite
angle, in the horizontal and vertical planes
thermometer
temperature
tiltmeter
minor changes to the Earth
tintometer
colour
universal measuring machine
geometric locations
vacuum gauge
very low pressure
viscometer
viscosity of a fluid
voltmeter
electric potential, voltage
VU meter
volume unit
wattmeter
electrical power
weighing scale
weight
wind vane
wind direction
zymometer
fermentation
See also[edit]
Astronomy portalElectronics portalEnergy portal
Category:Instrument-making corporations
Data logger measuring devices
History of measurement
History of weights and measures
Instrumentation
List of measuring devices
List of physical quantities
List of sensors
Metrology
Pocket comparator
Sensor or detector
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
Wikipedia:WikiProject Physics/Worklist of central experiments
Notes[edit]
The alternate spelling "-metre" is never used when referring to a measuring device.
References[edit]
External links[edit]
 Media related to Measuring instrument at Wikimedia Commons
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
2
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Measuring_instrument&oldid=1136326442"