Photography appearance
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Red-eye effect" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (March 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Intense red-eye effect in blue eyes with dilated pupil Red-eye effect seen on a teenager
The red-eye effect in photography is the common appearance of red pupils in color photographs of the eyes of humans and several other animals. It occurs when using a photographic flash that is very close to the camera lens (as with most compact cameras) in ambient low light.
Causes[edit]
 This odd-eyed cat displays red-eye effect of its tapetum lucidum only in its blue eye
In flash photography the light of the flash occurs too fast for the pupil to close, so much of the very bright light from the flash passes into the eye through the pupil, reflects off the fundus at the back of the eyeball and out through the pupil. The camera records this reflected light. The main cause of the red color is the ample amount of blood in the choroid which nourishes the back of the eye and is behind the retina.[1] The blood in the retinal circulation is far less than in the choroid, and plays virtually no role. The eye contains several photostable pigments that all absorb in the short wavelength region, and hence contribute somewhat to the red eye effect.[2] The lens cuts off deep blue and violet light, below 430 nm (depending on age), and macular pigment absorbs between 400 and 500 nm, but this pigment is located exclusively in the tiny fovea. Melanin, located in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and the choroid, shows a gradually increasing absorption towards the short wavelengths. But blood is the main determinant of the red color, because it is completely transparent at long wavelengths and abruptly starts absorbing at 600 nm. The amount of red light emerging from the pupil depends on the amount of melanin in the layers behind the retina. This amount varies strongly between individuals. Light-skinned people with blue eyes have relatively low melanin in the fundus and thus show a much stronger red-eye effect than dark-skinned people with brown eyes.
 Red-eye effect on dark brown eyes
The same holds for animals. The color of the iris itself is of virtually no importance for the red-eye effect. This is obvious because the red-eye effect is most apparent when photographing dark-adapted subjects, hence with fully dilated pupils. Photographs taken with infrared light through night vision devices always show very bright pupils because, in the dark, the pupils are fully dilated and the infrared light is not absorbed by any ocular pigment.
The role of melanin in red-eye effect is demonstrated in animals with heterochromia: only the blue eye displays the effect. The effect is still more pronounced in humans and animals with albinism. All forms of albinism involve abnormal production and/or deposition of melanin.
Red-eye effect is seen in photographs of children also because children's eyes have more rapid dark adaptation: in low light a child's pupils enlarge sooner, and an enlarged pupil accentuates the red-eye effect.
Theatrical followspot operators, positioned nearly coincidentally with a very bright light and somewhat distant from the actors, occasionally witness red-eye in actors on stage. The effect is not visible to the rest of the audience because it is reliant on the very small angle between the followspot operator and the light.
Similar effects[edit]
Similar effects, some related to red-eye effect, are of several kinds:
In many flash photographs, even those without perceptible red-eye effect, the tapetum lucidum of many animals' pupils creates an "eyeshine" effect. Although eyeshine is an unrelated phenomenon, animals with blue eyes may display the red-eye effect in addition to it.
A related effect, red reflex, is seen in fundoscopy; here, the reflected red light is directly visible through the ophthalmoscope.
In photographs recorded with infrared-sensitive passive (non-IR emitting) equipment, the eyes (not only the pupils) usually appear very bright. This is due not to reflection, but to radiation of core body heat in the form of infrared light (see Night vision).
Photography techniques for prevention and removal[edit]
Canon IXUS v3Exposure time: 1/60 secf/4
Spotted eagle-owl displays red-eye effect only on the eye facing the camera's ring flash
Canon EOS 100 camera with bright light to contract pupils
Motorola Milestone XT720 camera while capturing image with red-eye reduction and xenon flash.
Demonstration of automated red-eye removal with GIMP software.Before (L); After (R).
The red-eye effect can be prevented in a number of ways:[3]
Using bounce flash in which the flash head is aimed at a nearby pale colored surface such as a ceiling or wall or at a specialist photographic reflector. This both changes the direction of the flash and ensures that only diffused flash light enters the eye.
Placing the flash away from the camera's optical axis ensures that the light from the flash hits the eye at an oblique angle. The light enters the eye in a direction away from the optical axis of the camera and is refocused by the eye lens back along the same axis. Because of this the retina will not be visible to the camera and the eyes will appear natural.
Taking pictures without flash by increasing the ambient lighting, opening the lens aperture, using a faster film or detector, or reducing the shutter speed.
Using the red-eye reduction capabilities built into many modern cameras. These precede the main flash with a series of short, low-power flashes, or a continuous piercing bright light triggering the pupil to contract. (This should not be confused with some autofocus assist beams, which use a series of flashes for focus instead.)
Having the subject look away from the camera lens.
Increase the lighting in the room so that the subject's pupils are more constricted.
If direct flash must be used, a good rule of thumb is to separate the flash from the lens by 1/20 of the distance of the camera to the subject. For example, if the subject is 2 meters (6 feet) away, the flash head should be at least 10 cm (4 inches) away from the lens.
Professional photographers prefer to use ambient light or indirect flash, as the red-eye reduction system does not always prevent red eyes  for example, if people look away during the pre-flash. In addition, people do not look natural with small pupils, direct lighting from close to the camera lens is considered to produce unflattering photographs, and pre-flashes can be distracting or annoying.
Red-eye removal is built into many popular consumer graphics editing software packages, or is supported through red-eye reduction plug-ins; examples include Adobe Lightroom, Adobe Photoshop, Apple iPhoto, Corel Photo-Paint, GIMP, Google Picasa, Paint.NET and Microsoft Windows Photo Gallery. Some can automatically find eyes in the image and perform color correction, and can apply it to many photos at once. Others may require the operator to manually select the regions of the pupils to which correction is to be applied. When performed manually, correction may consist of simply converting the red area of pupils to grayscale (desaturating), leaving surface reflections and highlights intact.
As a medical warning sign[edit]
In a photograph of a child's face, if there is red-eye in one eye but not the other, it may be leukocoria, which may be caused by the cancer retinoblastoma. The child's eyes should be examined by a general physician.[4]
References[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Red-eye effect.
^ "5 Tips for Preventing Red Eyes in Photos". All About Vision. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
^ van de Kraats, Jan; van Norren, Dirk (2008). "Directional and nondirectional spectral reflection from the human fovea". Journal of Biomedical Optics. 13 (2): 024010. Bibcode:2008JBO....13b4010V. doi:10.1117/1.2899151. PMID 18465973.
^ 
Dave Johnson (16 January 2009). "HOW TO: Avoid the red eye effect". New Zealand PC World. Archived from the original on 24 February 2010. Retrieved 9 January 2010.
^ "Retinoblastoma (eye cancer in children)". 17 February 2014. Retrieved 13 June 2014.
vteAnatomy of the globe of the human eyeFibrous tunic (outer)Sclera
Episcleral layer
Schlemm's canal
Trabecular meshwork
Cornea
Limbus
layers
Epithelium
Bowman's
Stroma
Dua's layer
Descemet's
Endothelium
Uvea / vascular tunic (middle)Choroid
Capillary lamina of choroid
Bruch's membrane
Sattler's layer
Ciliary body
Ciliary processes
Ciliary muscle
Pars plicata
Pars plana
Iris
Stroma
Pupil
Iris dilator muscle
Iris sphincter muscle
Retina (inner)Layers
Inner limiting membrane
Nerve fiber layer
Ganglion cell layer
Inner plexiform layer
Inner nuclear layer
Outer plexiform layer
Outer nuclear layer
External limiting membrane
Layer of rods and cones
Retinal pigment epithelium
Cells
Photoreceptor cells (Cone cell, Rod cell)   (Horizontal cell)   Bipolar cell   (Amacrine cell)   Retina ganglion cell (Midget cell, Parasol cell, Bistratified cell, Giant retina ganglion cells, Photosensitive ganglion cell)   Diencephalon: P cell, M cell, K cell, Muller glia
Other
Macula
Perifoveal area
Parafoveal area
Fovea
Foveal avascular zone
Foveola
Optic disc
Optic cup
Ora serrata
Anatomical regions of the eyeAnterior segment
Adnexa (Eyebrow, Eyelid, Conjunctiva, Lacrimal system, Orbit)
Fibrous tunic
Anterior chamber
Aqueous humour
Iris
Posterior chamber
Ciliary body
Lens
Capsule of lens
Zonule of Zinn
Posterior segment
Vitreous chamber
Vitreous body
Retina
Choroid
Other
Keratocytes
Ocular immune system
Optical coherence tomography
Eye care professional
Eye disease
Refractive error
Accommodation
Physiological Optics
Visual perception
vtePhotographyEquipment
Camera
light-field
digital
field
instant
pinhole
press
rangefinder
SLR
still
TLR
toy
view
Darkroom
enlarger
safelight
Film
base
format
holder
stock
available films
discontinued films
Filter
Flash
beauty dish
cucoloris
gobo
hot shoe
lens hood
monolight
Reflector
snoot
Softbox
Lens
Prime lens
Zoom lens
Wide-angle lens
Telephoto lens
Manufacturers
Monopod
Movie projector
Slide projector
Tripod
head
Zone plate
Terminology
35 mm equivalent focal length
Angle of view
Aperture
Backscatter
Black and white
Chromatic aberration
Circle of confusion
Color balance
Color temperature
Depth of field
Depth of focus
Exposure
Exposure compensation
Exposure value
Zebra patterning
F-number
Film format
Large
Medium
Film speed
Focal length
Guide number
Hyperfocal distance
Lens flare
Metering mode
Perspective distortion
Photograph
Photographer
Photographic printing
Photographic processes
Reciprocity
Red-eye effect
Science of photography
Shutter speed
Sync
Zone System
Genres
Abstract
Aerial
Aircraft
Architectural
Astrophotography
Banquet
Candid
Conceptual
Conservation
Cloudscape
Documentary
Ethnographic
Erotic
Fashion
Fine-art
Fire
Forensic
Glamour
High-speed
Landscape
Nature
Neues Sehen
Nude
Photojournalism
Pictorialism
Pornography
Portrait
Post-mortem
Selfie
Social documentary
Sports
Still life
Stock
Straight photography
Street
Toy camera
Underwater
Vernacular
Wedding
Wildlife
Techniques
Afocal
Bokeh
Brenizer
Burst mode
Contre-jour
Cyanotype
ETTR
Fill flash
Fireworks
Harris shutter
High-speed
Holography
Infrared
Intentional camera movement
Kirlian
Kite aerial
Long-exposure
Macro
Mordan age
Multiple exposure
Multi-exposure HDR capture
Night
Panning
Panoramic
Photogram
Print toning
Redscale
Rephotography
Rollout
Scanography
Schlieren photography
Sabattier effect
Slow motion
Stereoscopy
Stopping down
Strip
Slit-scan
Sun printing
Tilt shift
Miniature faking
Time-lapse
Ultraviolet
Vignetting
Xerography
Composition
Diagonal method
Framing
Headroom
Lead room
Rule of thirds
Simplicity
Golden triangle (composition)
History
Timeline of photography technology
Analog photography
Autochrome Lumi re
Box camera
Calotype
Camera obscura
Daguerreotype
Dufaycolor
Heliography
Painted photography backdrops
Photography and the law
Glass plate
Visual arts
Regional
Albania
Bangladesh
Canada
China
Denmark
Greece
India
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Norway
Philippines
Serbia
Slovenia
Sudan
Taiwan
Turkey
Ukraine
United States
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Digital photography
Digital camera
D-SLR
comparison
MILC
camera back
Digiscoping
Comparison of digital and film photography
Film scanner
Image sensor
CMOS APS
CCD
Three-CCD camera
Foveon X3 sensor
Image sharing
Pixel
Color photography
Color
Print film
Chromogenic print
Reversal film
Color management
color space
primary color
CMYK color model
RGB color model
Photographicprocessing
Bleach bypass
C-41 process
Cross processing
Developer
Digital image processing
Dye coupler
E-6 process
Fixer
Gelatin silver process
Gum printing
Instant film
K-14 process
Print permanence
Push processing
Stop bath
Lists
Most expensive photographs
Museums devoted to one photographer
Photographs considered the most important
Photographers
Norwegian
Polish
street
women
Related
Conservation and restoration of photographs
film
photographic plates
 Category
 Outline
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Red-eye_effect&oldid=1144553022"