Christian feast day for Jesus's legal father
Saint Joseph's DaySaint Joseph with the Infant Jesus by Guido Reni, c 1635Also calledFeast of Saint JosephObserved byCatholic ChurchLutheran ChurchAnglican churchesCelebrationsCarrying blessed fava beans, wearing red-coloured clothing, assembling home altars dedicated to Saint Joseph, attending a Saint Joseph's Day paradeObservancesChurch attendance at Mass or Divine ServiceDateMarch 19Frequencyevery year (annual)
Saint Joseph's Day, also called the Feast of Saint Joseph or the Solemnity of Saint Joseph, is in Western Christianity the principal feast day of Saint Joseph, husband of the Virgin Mary and legal father of Jesus Christ, celebrated on 19 March. It has the rank of a solemnity in the Catholic Church. It is a feast or commemoration in the provinces of the Anglican Communion,[1] and a feast or festival in the Lutheran Church. Saint Joseph's Day is the Patronal Feast day for Poland as well as for Canada, persons named Joseph, Josephine, etc., for religious institutes, schools and parishes bearing his name, and for carpenters. It is also Father's Day in some Catholic countries, mainly Spain, Portugal, and Italy. It is not a holy day of obligation for Catholics in the United States.
19 March was dedicated to Saint Joseph in several Western calendars by the 10th century, and this custom was established in Rome by 1479. Pope Pius V extended its use to the entire Roman Rite by his Apostolic Constitution Quo primum (14 July 1570). Originally a double of the second class and a feast of precept, it was re-raised to be of precept in 1917 after having this status intermittently lost, and consequently also raised to its current rank of double of the first class (now called a solemnity), having become in the meantime the rank common to all remaining general feasts of precept. Since 1969, Episcopal Conferences may, if they wish, transfer it to a date outside Lent. Even if it occurs inside Lent on the usual date of 19 March, it is still observed as a Solemnity of a Saint this is one of the few times during Lent the Gloria may be said or sung, the vesture is changed from the purple or violet of Lent to white or gold (as it would be for such a solemnity normally), the Collect and the Eucharistic Prayer's Preface and other prayers are from the Solemnity and not Lent, the hymns are more joyful, and the Creed is said. However, the Alleluia is still not used, the Tract being used instead, per Lenten regulations.[2]
Between 1870 and 1955, an additional feast was celebrated in honor of Saint Joseph as Spouse of the Blessed Virgin Mary and Patron of the Universal Church, the latter title having been given to him by Pope Pius IX. Originally celebrated on the third Sunday after Easter with an octave, after Divino Afflatu[3] of Saint Pius X (see Reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X), it was moved to the preceding Wednesday (because Wednesday was the day of the week specifically dedicated to St. Joseph, St. John the Baptist and local patrons). The feast was also retitled The Solemnity of Saint Joseph. This celebration and its accompanying octave were abolished during the modernisation and simplification of rubrics under Pope Pius XII in 1955.
At the same time, Pope Pius XII established an additional Feast of "St. Joseph the Worker", to be celebrated on 1 May, in order to coincide with the celebration of International Workers' Day (May Day) in many countries.  Until this time, 1 May had been the Feast of the Apostles Saint Philip and James, but that Feast was then moved to the next free day, 11 May (and again to 3 May, in 1969, having become free in the meantime).  In the new calendar published in 1969, the Feast of Saint Joseph The Worker, which at one time occupied the highest possible rank in the Church calendar, was reduced to an optional Memorial, the lowest rank for a saint's day.[4]
The Eastern Orthodox Church celebrates Saint Joseph on the Sunday after Christmas.[5]
Popular customs among Christians of various liturgical traditions observing Saint Joseph's Day are attending Mass or the Divine Service, wearing red-coloured clothing, carrying dried fava beans that have been blessed, and assembling home altars dedicated to Saint Joseph.[6]
Christian traditions[edit]
Part of a series onJosephologyof the Catholic ChurchSaint Joseph (c. 1640) by Guido Reni.
General articles
Saint Joseph
Holy Family
marriage
Saint Joseph's dreams
Saint Joseph's Day
Prayers and devotions
Prayer
Novena
Chaplet
Scapular
Cord
Organisations
Sisters of St. Joseph
Josephite Fathers
Josephites of Belgium
Sisters of St Joseph of the Sacred Heart
Oblates of St. Joseph
Papal documents
Quamquam pluries
Redemptoris custos
 Catholicism portalvte
March 19 always falls during Lent, a season traditionally marked by fast and abstinence. Saint Joseph's day, however, is a solemnity and per the 1983 Code of Canon Law overrides Friday obligations in the Catholic Church.[7] Previously, per the 1917 Code of Canon Law, the obligation of fasting and abstinence was not dispensed on St. Joseph's Day even where it was kept as a Holy Day of Obligation: "On [Sundays] or feasts of precept, the law of abstinence or of abstinence and fast or of fast only ceases, except during Lent, nor is the vigil anticipated; likewise it ceases on Holy [Saturday] afternoon" (1917 Code, Canon 1252   4).[8]
If the feast day falls on a Sunday other than Palm Sunday, it is observed on the next available day, usually Monday, 20 March, unless another solemnity (e.g., a church's patronal saint) falls on that day.[7] Since 2008, if Saint Joseph's Day falls during Holy Week, it is moved to the closest possible day before 19 March, usually the Saturday before Holy Week. This change was announced by the Congregation for Divine Worship in Notitiae in order to avoid occurrences of the feasts of Saint Joseph and the Annunciation both being moved to just after the Easter octave.[9] This decision does not apply to those using the 1962 Missal according to the provisions of Summorum Pontificum; when that missal is used, its particular rubrics, which require the feast to be transferred to the next available date after 19 March, must be observed. In practice, the 1962 rubrics lead to the observance of St. Joseph's Day on the Tuesday following the Second Sunday of Easter, as the Feast of the Annunciation (which must also be transferred in years when its assigned date, 25 March, falls during either Holy Week or the octave of Easter) is observed on the Monday after the Second Sunday of Easter.[citation needed]
Italy[edit]
In Sicily, where Saint Joseph is regarded by many as their patron saint, and in many Italian-American communities, thanks are given to Saint Joseph (San Giuseppe in Italian). Giving food to the needy is a Saint Joseph's Day custom. In some communities it is traditional to wear red clothing and eat a Neapolitan pastry known as a zeppola (created in 1840 by Don Pasquale Pinatauro in Napoli) on Saint Joseph's Day.[10] Maccu di San Giuseppe is a traditional Sicilian dish that consists of various ingredients and maccu that is prepared on this day.[11] Maccu is a foodstuff and soup that dates to ancient times which is prepared with fava beans as a primary ingredient.[11]
One prominent custom is the Saint Joseph's day altar, which has spread from Sicily to the United States in the 1800s. These altars are typically elaborate; being decorated with figurines, medals, and votive candles. The Saint Joseph's day altar is into three sections representing the three persons of the Trinity, and has a statue of Joseph at its head. The tables are dressed with food, which are donated to the poor on the solemnity.[12] Upon a typical Saint Joseph's Day altar, people place flowers, limes, candles, wine, fava beans, specially prepared cakes, breads, and cookies (as well as other meatless dishes), and zeppole. Foods are traditionally served containing bread crumbs to represent saw dust since Joseph was a carpenter. Because the feast occurs during Lent, traditionally no meat was allowed on the celebration table. The altar usually has three tiers, to represent the Trinity.[13]
According to legend, Saint Joseph interceded to relieve a famine in Sicily during the Middle Ages. There was a severe drought at the time, and the people prayed for their patron saint to bring them rain. They promised that if God answered their prayers through Joseph's intercession, they would prepare a large feast to honor him. The rain did come, and the people of Sicily prepared a large banquet for their patron saint. The fava bean was the crop which saved the population from starvation and is a traditional part of Saint Joseph's Day altars and traditions.[14] On the Sicilian island of Lipari, the Saint Joseph legend is modified somewhat, and says that sailors returning from the mainland encountered a fierce storm that threatened to sink their boat.  They prayed to Saint Joseph for deliverance, and when they were saved, they swore to honor the saint each year on his feast day.[citation needed]
Some villages like Avola used to burn wood and logs in squares on the day before Saint Joseph, as thanksgiving to the Saint. In Belmonte Mezzagno this is currently still performed every year, while people  ritually  shout invocations to the Saint in local Sicilian language. This is called "A Vampa di San Giuseppe" (the Saint Joseph's bonfire).
Spectacular celebrations are also held in Bagheria. Joseph is even celebrated twice a year, the second time being held especially for people from Bagheria who come back for summer vacation from other parts of Italy or abroad.
In Italy, 19 March is also Father's Day.[15]
Malta[edit]
In Malta, the set date for the celebration of Saint Joseph is 19 March, but can be moved if necessary to fit into the Lent and Easter season. This has been a day of remembrance in Malta since the 10th century A.D. Most businesses shut down for this day for all the celebrations that occur. The main celebrations are held in Mdina, which is the "old capital" of Malta in the suburbs of the city of Rabat.[16] There are three main events that occur for this day. One of them being special masses in honor of Saint Joseph. Then it follows with colorful processions with music bands in the streets and fireworks at night. The main procession takes place in the evening with the statue of Saint Joseph being carried to the church of Saint Mary of Jesus. The statue represents a high level of workmanship for the figure Joseph had in Jesus' life.[17] Also, this is one of the public holidays in Malta, known as Jum San  u epp. People celebrate mass in the morning, and in the afternoon go for a picnic. It is a liturgical feast that occurs on a Sunday in summer. However, the city of Rabat celebrates the traditional Maltese feast where in the evening a procession is also held with the statue of Saint Joseph. On this day also the city of  ejtun celebrates the day, known as Jum il-Kunsill (Zejtun Council's Day), till 2013 was known as Jum i - ejtun (Zejtun's Day). During this day a prominent person from  ejtun is given the  ejtun Honour ( ie  i - ejtun). In the past years the  ejtun Parish Church has celebrated these feast days with a procession with the statue of Saint Joseph.[citation needed]
Spain[edit]
Main article: Falles
In Spain, Saint Joseph's Day is their version of Father's Day, which is called El Dia del Padre. In some parts of Spain it is celebrated as Falles. They feel that Saint Joseph is a good example of what a father figure should be like, which is why they connect these two days. Since Spain does correlate this day with Father's Day, it is tradition for children to cook their fathers breakfast or even give small gifts. It is a "meatless affair", because it occurs during the Lenten season. Some symbols to represent this day include Jesus holding carpenter tools, baby Jesus, and a staff with lilies. A few things to do on this day to celebrate are attending a special church service, visiting different cathedrals, joining Valencia's Falla Festival, and exploring the city, museums and art galleries. The Falla Festival runs for 5 days and ends on 19 March in remembrance of Saint Joseph.[18]
Poland[edit]
Polish families celebrate this day with a Saint Joseph's table in their house that is decorated with red and white for Poland and Saint Joseph. These tables set up in their house include holy cards and candles all around and meatless food in which they call a "festive fast" because it is Lent season. To represent and honor Saint Joseph, Poland has hymns they made. A few of the hymns are Duszo moja, O Jozefie Ukochany, and Szczesliwy, Kto Sobie Patrona.[19]
Philippines[edit]
In the Philippines, especially in rice producing provinces like Iloilo, some families maintain the ritual of holding a banquet for the Holy Family. An old man, a young lady, and a small boy, often chosen from among the poor, are honoured as representations of Saint Joseph, the Blessed Virgin Mary, and the Child Jesus, respectively. The three, sometimes dressed like the santo (traditional saint image) they each represent, are seated around a table set with the family's best silverware and china, and served a variety of courses. Hymns are sung while they are literally spoonfed by senior members of the host family and important guests. The Novena to Saint Joseph is also recited at a nearby temporary altar. The hosts and other participants then seek blessings from the "Holy Family" by paying obeisance to the three individuals (or images of the holy personages they represent), either through kissing icons in the hands of the trio or performing mano, all while genuflecting before them. The now-fed "Holy Family" are lastly given donations (monetary or in kind), which they split amongst themselves, as a thank-you gift after the ceremony.[20]
United States[edit]
 Traditional Saint Joseph's Altar in New Orleans
In New Orleans, Louisiana, which was a major port of entry for Sicilian immigrants during the late 19th century, the Feast of Saint Joseph is a citywide event. Both public and private Saint Joseph's altars are traditionally built, especially in and around the Lake Vista neighborhood. The altars are usually open to any visitor who wishes to pay homage. The food is generally distributed to charity after the altar is dismantled.[21] Saint Joseph's altars can be found in churches and public spaces throughout southeast Louisiana during this season.[citation needed]
There are also parades in honor of Saint Joseph and the Italian population of New Orleans which are similar to the many marching clubs and truck parades of Mardi Gras and Saint Patrick's Day. Tradition in New Orleans also holds that by burying a small statue of Saint Joseph upside down in the front yard of a house, that house will sell more promptly. In addition to the above traditions, some groups of Mardi Gras Indians stage their last procession of the season on the Sunday nearest to Saint Joseph's Day otherwise known as "Super Sunday," after which their costumes are dismantled.[22]
Saint Joseph's Day is also celebrated in other American communities with high proportions of Italians such as New York City; Utica, NY; Syracuse, NY; Niagara Falls, NY; Rochester, NY; Buffalo, NY; Hawthorne, NJ; Hoboken, NJ; Jersey City, NJ; Kansas City, MO; Chicago, IL[23] Gloucester, Mass.; Hartford, Connecticut; and Providence, Rhode Island, where observance (which takes place just after Saint Patrick's Day) often is expressed through "the wearing of the red", i.e., wearing red clothing or accessories similar to the wearing of green on Saint Patrick's Day. Saint Joseph's Day tables may also be found in Rockford and Elmwood Park, Illinois.[24]
Americans of Polish ancestry, especially those in the Midwest and New England, who have the name Joseph celebrate Saint Joseph's Day (Dzien Swietego Jozefa) as an imieniny. As a symbol of ethnic pride, and in solidarity with their Italian counterparts, Polish Catholic parishes often hold Saint Joseph's Day feasts known as Saint Joseph's Tables or Saint Joseph's altars, and display statues and holy cards of Saint Joseph. As the day falls during Lent, these are meatless feasts.[25]
In the Mid-Atlantic regions, Saint Joseph's Day is traditionally associated with the return of anadromous fish, such as striped bass, to their natal rivers, such as the Delaware.[citation needed]
Saint Joseph's Day is also the day when the swallows are traditionally believed to return to Mission San Juan Capistrano after having flown south for the winter.[26]
Canada[edit]
Saint Joseph is the patron saint of Canada.[27] Saint Joseph's Oratory in Montreal hosts a novena and special masses to celebrate the feast of Saint Joseph. These events draw thousands of pilgrims to the basilica.[28]
England[edit]
Joseph of Nazareth is remembered in the Church of England with a Festival on 19 March.[29]
See also[edit]
Holidays portal
Calendar of saints
References[edit]
^ The Prayerbook Society of Canada Archived 4 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine
^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1969), p. 89
^ Latin original of Divino Afflatu; English translation
^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1969), p. 92
^ "St. Joseph   Questions & Answers". www.oca.org. Orthodox Church in America. Retrieved 8 March 2021.
^ Jankowski, Nicole (18 March 2017). "Move Over, St. Patrick: St. Joseph's Feast Is When Italians Parade : The Salt : NPR". NPR. Retrieved 20 March 2017.
^ a b Miller, Jennifer Gregory. "The Oases of Lent: Celebrations of St. Patrick, St. Joseph, Annunciation and Family Days". www.catholicculture.org. Retrieved 8 March 2021.
^ Monsignor Jason Gray of the Diocese of Peoria. "1917 Code of Canon Law". www.jgray.org. Retrieved 16 March 2021.
^ "Notificazione". Notitiae. 475 476 (in Italian). Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacrements. 42 (3 4): 96. March April 2006. Retrieved 15 February 2021.
^ "Non-Stop New York's Italianissimo: La Festa di San Giuseppe NYC-Style". AOL. Archived from the original on 7 November 2006.
^ a b Clarkson, Janet (2013). Food History Almanac. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 262. ISBN 978-1442227156.
^ "St. Joseph's Day Altars". www.neworleans.com. City of New Orleans. Retrieved 8 March 2021.
^ "Louisiana Project   St. Joseph's Day Altars". houstonculture.org.
^ Jankowski, Nicole (18 March 2017). "Move Over, St. Patrick: St. Joseph's Feast Is When Italians Parade". NPR.org. Retrieved 8 March 2021.
^ "Father's Day in Italy in 2021". Office Holidays. Retrieved 30 June 2020.
^ "19 March   St. Joseph Day in Malta". aum.edu. American University of Malta. 18 March 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2021.
^ "Feast of St Joseph 2018 and 2019   Public Holidays Malta". Public Holidays Malta. Retrieved 8 May 2017.
^ "St Joseph's Day 2018 and 2019   Public Holidays Spain". Public Holidays Spain. Retrieved 8 May 2017.
^ Gunkel, Ann/David. "Polish Easter Traditions * St. Joseph's Day/Dzien Sw. Jozefa, March 19". annhetzelgunkel.com. Retrieved 4 May 2017.
^ "Feast of San Jose: Traditions, rituals and gastronomy". Flavours of Iloilo. 19 March 2014. Retrieved 19 March 2019.
^ "St. Joseph's Day Altars". neworleansonline.com.
^ "Mardi Gras Indians Super Sunday around St. Joseph's Day". mardigrasneworleans.com.
^ St. Joseph's Day celebration sets the table for sharing; Chicago Sun-Times
^ Pisano, Maryanne, "St. Joseph's Day feast table raises money for charity", Sun Times, March 18, 2013
^ Barbara Rolek. "St. Joseph's Day in Poland   How St. Joseph's Day Is Celebrated in Poland   Dzien Swietego Jozefa". About.com Food.
^ "Signature Events   Mission San Juan Capistrano". missionsjc.com. Archived from the original on 11 March 2013.
^ Kokoski, Paul. "St. Joseph, Patron Saint of Canada and the Universal Church". Canada Free Press. Retrieved 18 March 2021.
^ "Saint Joseph's Oratory Welcomes Thousands of Visitors to Celebrate the Feast of Saint Joseph". www.newswire.ca. Retrieved 18 March 2021.
^ "The Calendar". The Church of England. Retrieved 27 March 2021.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saint Joseph's Day.
Catholic Church Calendar
Anglican Calendar Archived 9 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine
Saint Joseph's Day Altars
Prayer to Saint Joseph
Saint Joseph's Day   Fathers Day
vte Holidays, observances, and celebrations in the United StatesJanuary
New Year's Day (federal)
Martin Luther King Jr. Day (federal)
Birthday of Eugenio Mar a de Hostos (PR)
Confederate Heroes Day (TX)
Eve of Three Kings' Day (PR, religious)
Feast of Epiphany / Feast of Theophany (religious)
Fred Korematsu Day (AZ, CA, FL, HI, VA)
Idaho Human Rights Day (ID)
Inauguration Day (federal quadrennial)
Kansas Day (KS)
Makar Sankranti / Pongal (religious)
Robert E. Lee Day (FL)
Stephen Foster Memorial Day (36)
The Eighth (LA)
Three Kings' Day (PR, VI, religious)
World Religion Day (religious)January February
Super Bowl Sunday
Chinese New Year / Lunar New Year (NY, cultural, religious)
Vasant Panchami (religious)FebruaryAmerican Heart MonthBlack History Month
Washington's Birthday (federal)
Valentine's Day
Birthday of Luis Mu oz Mar n (PR)
Candlemas (religious)
Charles Darwin Day / Darwin Day (CA, DE)
Day of Remembrance (CA, OR, WA, cultural)
Georgia Day (GA)
Groundhog Day
Imbolc (religious)
Lincoln's Birthday (CA, CT, IL, IN, MO, NY, WV)
National Girls and Women in Sports Day
National Freedom Day (36)
Nirvana Day (religious)
Presentation of Our Lord to the Temple (religious)
Promised Reformer Day (religious)
Ronald Reagan Day (CA)
Rosa Parks Day (CA, MO)
Saviours' Day (religious)
Susan B. Anthony Day (CA, FL, NY, WI, WV, proposed federal)
Tu B shvat (religious)February March
Mardi Gras
Ash Wednesday (PR, religious)
Carnival (PR, VI, religious)
Clean Monday (religious)
Courir de Mardi Gras (religious)
Intercalary Days (religious)
Mahashivaratri (religious)
Purim (religious)
Shrove Tuesday (religious)
Super TuesdayMarchIrish-American Heritage MonthColon Cancer Awareness MonthWomen's History Month
Saint Patrick's Day (religious)
Spring break (week)
Annunciation of the Virgin Mary / Annunciation of the Theotokos (religious)
Casimir Pulaski Day (IL)
Cesar Chavez Day (CA, CO, TX, proposed federal)
Emancipation Day in Puerto Rico (PR, cultural)
Evacuation Day (Suffolk County, MA)
Harriet Tubman Day (NY)
Hola Mohalla (religious)
Holi (NY, religious)
L. Ron Hubbard s Birthday (religious)
Lailat al-Mi'raj (religious)
Liberation and Freedom Day (Charlottesville, VA, cultural)
Mardi Gras (AL (in two counties), LA)
Maryland Day (MD)
National Poison Prevention Week (week)
Nowruz (cultural, religious)
Ostara (religious)
Prince Jonah K hi  Kalaniana ole Day (HI)
Promised Messiah Day (religious)
Saint Joseph's Day (religious)
Seward's Day (AK)
Texas Independence Day (TX)
Town Meeting Day (VT)
Transfer Day (VI)
Trans Day of Visibility (cultural)March April
Easter (religious)
Good Friday (CT, NC, PR, NJ, VI, religious)
Hanuman Jayanti (religious)
Holy Thursday (PR, VI, religious)
Holy Week (PR, religious, week)
Lazarus Saturday (religious)
Mahavir Janma Kalyanak (religious)
Mesha Sankranti / Hindu New Year (religious)
Palm Sunday (PR, religious)
Passover (religious, week)
Easter Monday / Bright Monday (VI, religious)
Ramnavami (religious)
Chandramana Uugadi / Souramana Uugadi (religious)AprilArab American Heritage MonthConfederate History Month
420
April Fools' Day
Arbor Day
Birthday of Jos  de Diego (PR)
Confederate Memorial Day (AL, MS)
Days of Remembrance of the Victims of the Holocaust (week)
Earth Day
Emancipation Day (cultural)
Thomas Jefferson's Birthday (AL)
Lag B Omer (religious)
Last Friday of Great Lent (religious)
Pascua Florida (FL)
Patriots' Day (MA, ME)
Ridv n (religious)
San Jacinto Day (TX)
Siblings Day
Walpurgis Night (religious)
Yom Ha'atzmaut (cultural, religious)
MayAsian Pacific American Heritage MonthJewish American Heritage MonthMilitary Appreciation Month
Memorial Day (federal)
Mother's Day (36)
Cinco de Mayo
Ascension of Bah u'll h (religious)
Ascension of Our Lord (religious)
Caliphate Day (religious)
Declaration of the Bab (religious)
Harvey Milk Day (CA)
International Workers' Day / May Day (CA, unofficial, proposed state)
Law Day (36)
Loyalty Day (36)
Malcolm X Day (CA, IL, proposed federal)
Military Spouse Day
National Day of Prayer (36)
National Day of Reason
National Defense Transportation Day (36)
National Maritime Day (36)
Peace Officers Memorial Day (36)
Pentecost (religious)
Shavuot (religious)
Truman Day (MO)
Vesak / Buddha's Birthday (religious)JuneLesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Pride Month
Juneteenth (federal, cultural)
Father's Day (36)
Bunker Hill Day (Suffolk County, MA)
Carolina Day (SC)
Fast of the Holy Apostles (religious)
Flag Day (36, proposed federal)
Helen Keller Day (PA)
Honor America Days (3 weeks)
Jefferson Davis Day (AL, FL)
Kamehameha Day (HI)
Litha (religious)
Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev Sahib (religious)
Odunde Festival (Philadelphia, PA, cultural)
Senior Week (week)
Saint John's Day (PR, religious)
West Virginia Day (WV)July
Independence Day (federal)
Asalha Puja Day (religious)
Birthday of Don Luis Mu oz Rivera (PR)
Birthday of Dr. Jos  Celso Barbosa (PR)
Emancipation Day in the U.S. Virgin Islands (VI, cultural)
Guru Purnima (religious)
Khordad Sal (religious)
L  Ho iho i Ea (HI, unofficial, cultural)
Martyrdom of the B b (religious)
Parents' Day (36)
Pioneer Day (UT)
Puerto Rico Constitution Day (PR)July August
Summer vacation
Tisha B'Av (religious)August
American Family Day (AZ)
Barack Obama Day in Illinois (IL)
Bennington Battle Day (VT)
Dormition of the Theotokos (religious)
Eid-e-Ghadeer (religious)
Fast in Honor of the Holy Mother of Lord Jesus (religious)
Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary (religious)
Hawaii Admission Day / Statehood Day (HI)
Krishna Janmashtami (religious)
Lammas (religious)
Lyndon Baines Johnson Day (TX)
Naga Panchami (religious)
National Aviation Day (36)
Paryushana (religious)
Raksha Bandhan (religious)
Transfiguration of the Lord (religious)
Victory Day (RI)
Women's Equality Day (36)
SeptemberProstate Cancer Awareness MonthChildhood Cancer Awareness Month
Labor Day (federal)
Brazilian Day (NY, cultural)
California Admission Day (CA)
Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day (36)
Constitution Day (36)
Constitution Week (week)
Defenders Day (MD)
Elevation of the Holy Cross (religious)
Feast of San Gennaro (NY, cultural, religious)
Ganesh Chaturthi (religious)
Gold Star Mother's Day (36)
His Holiness Sakya Trizin s Birthday (religious)
Mabon (religious)
National Grandparents Day (36)
National Payroll Week (week)
Nativity of Mary / Nativity of the Theotokos (religious)
Native American Day (proposed federal)
Patriot Day (36)September OctoberHispanic Heritage Month
Chehlum Imam Hussain (religious)
Oktoberfest
Pitri Paksha (religious)
Rosh Hashanah / Feast of Trumpets (TX, NY, religious)
Shemini Atzeret (religious)
Simchat Torah (religious)
Vijaya Dashami (religious)
Yom Kippur / Day of Atonement (TX, NY, religious)
OctoberBreast Cancer Awareness MonthDisability Employment Awareness Month Italian-American Heritage and Culture Month  Filipino American History MonthLGBT History Month
Columbus Day (federal)
Halloween
Alaska Day (AK)
Child Health Day (36)
General Pulaski Memorial Day
German-American Day
Indigenous Peoples' Day
International Day of Non-Violence
Leif Erikson Day (36)
Missouri Day (MO)
Nanomonestotse (cultural)
National School Lunch Week (week)
Native American Day in South Dakota (SD)
Nevada Day (NV)
Spirit Day (cultural)
Sweetest Day
Sukkot / Feast of Tabernacles (religious, week)
Virgin Islands Puerto Rico Friendship Day (PR, VI)
White Cane Safety Day (36)October November
Birth of the B b (religious)
Birth of Bah u'll h (religious)
Day of the Dead (VI)
Diwali (NY, religious)
Mawlid al-Nabi (religious)
November Native American Indian Heritage Month
Veterans Day (federal)
Thanksgiving (federal)
Ascension of  Abdu l Baha (religious)
All Saints' Day (religious)
Beginning of the Nativity Fast (religious)
Beltane / Samhain (religious)
Barack Obama Day in Alabama (Perry County, AL)
D. Hamilton Jackson Day (VI)
Day after Thanksgiving (24)
Day of the Covenant (religious)
Discovery of Puerto Rico Day (PR)
Election Day (CA, DE, HI, KY, MT, NJ, NY, OH, PR, VA, WV, proposed federal)
Family Day (NV)
Guru Nanak Gurpurab (religious)
Hanukkah (religious)
L  K oko a (HI, unofficial, cultural)
Martyrdom of Guru Tegh Bahadur (religious)
Native American Heritage Day (MD, WA, cultural)
Presentation of the Theotokos to the Temple (religious)
Trans Day of Remembrance (cultural)
Unthanksgiving Day (cultural)December
Christmas (religious, federal)
New Year's Eve
Advent Sunday (religious)
Alabama Day (AL)
Birthday of Guru Gobind Singh Sahib (religious)
Bodhi Day (religious)
Chalica (religious)
Christmas Eve (KY, NC, SC, PR, VI)
Day after Christmas (KY, NC, SC, TX, VI)
Festivus
HumanLight
Hanukkah (religious, week)
Immaculate Conception (religious)
Indiana Day (IN)
Kwanzaa (cultural, week)
Milad Syedna Mohammed Burhanuddin (religious)
National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day (36)
Nativity of Jesus (religious)
Old Year's Night (VI)
Pan American Aviation Day (36)
Pancha Ganapati (religious, week)
Rosa Parks Day (OH, OR)
Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God (religious)
Wright Brothers Day (36)
Yule (religious)
Zartosht No-Diso (religious)Varies (year round)
Eid al-Adha (NY, religious)
Eid al-Fitr (NY, religious)
Islamic New Year (religious)
Yawm al-Arafa (religious)
Hajj (religious)
Laylat al-Qadr (religious)
Navaratri (religious, four times a year)
Obon (religious)
Onam (religious)
Ramadan (religious, month)
Ghost Festival (religious)
Yawm Aashura (religious)
Legend: 
(federal) = federal holidays, (abbreviation) = state/territorial holidays, (religious) = religious holidays, (cultural) = holiday related to a specific racial/ethnic group or sexual minority, (week) = week-long holidays, (month) = month-long holidays, (36) = Title 36 Observances and Ceremonies
See also: Lists of holidays, Hallmark holidays, Public holidays in the United States, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands.
vteCatholic Church
Index
Outline
Glossary
Lists of Catholics
History(TimelineEcclesiasticalLegal)Early Church
Jesus
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Apostles
Succession
Petrine primacy
Church fathers
Apostolic fathers
History of the papacy
Primacy
Great Church
Ante-Nicene Period
Constantine
First seven ecumenical councils
Nicaea I
Chalcedon
Late antiquity
Biblical canon
Monasticism
Middle Ages
Islamic conquests
Pope Gregory I
Papal States
Schism (1054)
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
Schism (1378)
Inquisition
Universities
Scholasticism
Age of Discovery
Modern era
Protestantism
Protestant Reformation
Catholic Reformation
Trent
Thirty Years' War
Enlightenment
French Revolution
Nazism
Vatican II
Communism
Sexual abuse scandal
Islam
COVID-19 pandemic
Theology(BibleTradition;Catechism)General
God
Trinity
Kingdom
Body and soul
Divine grace
Dogma
Nicene Creed
Original sin
Saints
Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Vulgate
Official Bible
Sixtine Vulgate
Sixto-Clementine Vulgate
Nova Vulgata
Worship
Ecclesiology
Communitas perfecta
Councils
Ecumenism
Four marks
One true church
Catholic
Infallibility
Mystici Corporis Christi
People of God
Three states
Subsistit in
In canon law
Sacraments
Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick
Last rites
Holy orders
Matrimony
Mariology
Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration
See also:
Josephology
Philosophy
Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers
Philosophy of canon law
See also:
Science
Evolution
Separation of church and state
Relations
Politics
Saints
Holy Family
Mary
Joseph
Patriarchs
Prophets
Archangels
Martyrs
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Confessors
Disciples
Virgins
Organisation(HierarchyCanon lawLaityPrecedenceBy country)Holy See(List of popes)
Pope Francis
Ecumenical councils
College of Cardinals
List
Advisers
Roman Curia
Dicasteries
Synod of Bishops
Properties
Vatican City
Index
Outline
Apostolic Palace
Lateran Treaty
Roman Rota
St. Peter's Basilica
Swiss Guard
Vatican Museums
Polity (Holy orders)
Diocese
Episcopal conference
Eparchy
Bishop
Patriarch
Major
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan
Coadjutor
Auxiliary
Titular
Emeritus
Parish
Priest
Deacon
Consecrated life
Religious:
Superior
Abbot, Abbess
General
Provincial
Prior, Prioress
Grand Master
Brother
Friar
Monk
Sister
Nun
Hermit
Novice
Master
Oblate
Postulant
Particular churchessui iuris
Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches
Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian
Catholic liturgy
Eastern Catholic liturgy
Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syriac
West Syriac
Malankara
Latin
Ambrosian
Braga
Mozarabic
Roman
Paul VI
Tridentine
Anglican
Zaire
Culture
Art
Marian
Artists
Authors
Church buildings
Altarpieces
Folk
Library
Museums
Music
Distinctions
Role in civilisation
See also:
Criticism of the Catholic Church
Anti-Catholicism
Media
Holy See Press Office
Vatican Media
Vatican News
Vatican Television Center
Vatican Radio
Vatican Polyglot Press
L'Osservatore Romano
Acta Apostolicae Sedis
Annuario Pontificio
Religious orders,institutes, societies
Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Legionaries
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines
Associationsof the faithful
Confraternities
Lay
Marian
Youth
Workers
Third orders
Saint Dominic
Lay Carmelites
Discalced
Saint Francis
Secular
Military orders
Fimcap
Catholic Action
Charismatic Renewal
Communion and Liberation
Sant'Egidio
Focolare
International Alliance of Catholic Knights
Scouting
Legion of Mary
Neocatechumenal Way
Opus Dei
Schoenstatt
Charities
Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas
Catholic Charities USA
Home Missions
Relief Services
CIDSE
Pax Christi
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul
See also:
Health care
Schools
Universities
 Catholic Church portal
 Category
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saint_Joseph%27s_Day&oldid=1145620738"