"Spider Solitaire" redirects here. For the Microsoft Windows version of Spider Solitaire, see Microsoft Spider Solitaire.
For the solitaire game played in a 4 3 grid, see Little Spider.
SpiderA Patience gameOne initial layout in the game of SpiderNamed variantsRelaxed Spider, Will o' the WispFamilySpiderDeckDouble 52-cardSee also Glossary of solitaire
Spider is a type of patience game,[1][2] and is one of the more popular two-deck solitaire games. The game originates in 1949, and its name comes from a spider's eight legs, referencing the eight foundation piles that must be filled to win the game.[3]
Rules[edit]
The main purpose of the game is to remove all cards from the table, assembling them in the tableau before removing them.[4]  Initially, 54 cards are dealt to the tableau in ten piles, face down except for the top cards. The tableau piles build down by rank, and in-suit sequences can be moved together. The 50 remaining cards can be dealt to the tableau ten at a time when none of the piles are empty.
A typical Spider layout requires the use of two decks.  The Tableau consists of 10 stacks, with 6 cards in the first 4 stacks, with the 6th card face up, and 5 cards in the remaining 6 stacks, with the 5th card face up.  Each time the stock is used it deals out one card to each stack.
Variants[edit]
Given its popularity, numerous Spider variants exist:
 Spiderette layout
Spider 2 Suit: Same as classic Spider solitaire, except this game is played with only 2 suits instead of 4, usually Spades and Hearts.
Spider 1 Suit: Same as classic Spider solitaire, except this game is played with only 1 suit instead of 4, usually Spades.
Relaxed Spider: Does not require all spaces to be filled before redealing
Spiderette: Only one pack, a Klondike layout with 7 stacks ranging from 1 to 7 cards in each[5][6]
Will o' the Wisp is another solitaire card game which was invented by Geoffrey Mott-Smith and is played the same way as Spiderette. The exception is that on the onset, twenty-one cards are dealt into seven columns of three with only the top card of each column face-up.
Simple Simon is another common one-deck variant of Spider.
Mrs. Mop is a Spider relative in which all the cards are dealt face-up.
Software[edit]
Implementations[edit]
 Spider 2 Suit layout
Common software versions of Spider are included with versions of Microsoft Windows 7, Vista, ME and XP as Spider Solitaire. Spider Solitaire was introduced in the Microsoft Plus! 98 addition pack for Windows 98.[7] The game comes in three versions of difficulty: 1, 2, or 4 suits.[8]
An earlier version was written for Windows 3.x in 1991 by John A. Junod, the original developer of WS_FTP. The final version was Windows Spider Solitaire version 92.01.04. He also wrote a DOS version called EGA-Spider with version up to 93.07.05. A similar game called Arachnid, was also written for Windows 3.x in 1991 by Ian Heath, a computer science professor at the University of Southampton in the UK. The latest known version is 1.2 and is quite well polished. This game was also re-written for 32-bit operating systems and is referred to as Arachnid 32.[citation needed]
On Unix operating systems, an early version was developed around 1989 at Sun Microsystems. A version of Spider Solitaire typically comes bundled with both the KDE and GNOME desktop environments on other Unix-like operating systems such as Linux and BSD, under the names KPatience and AisleRiot Solitaire, respectively.  Versions for Macintosh and most other operating systems are also available.[citation needed]
The newer Windows versions offer three levels of difficulty, with one, two, or four suits.  These play modes are equivalent to disregarding suit difference, either within the colors or altogether, and thus can be simulated in the physical card game, though the computer version aids visibility by representing all cards as spades and/or hearts.[citation needed]
Scoring[edit]
Different software implementations of spider offer alternative scoring rules. The version from Sun Microsystems from 1989 defines the following rules in the manual: 10 points for each initially face down card that gets turned over; 15 additional points for each column where all the face-down cards have been turned over (even if you don't manage to get a space); 2 points for each card that is sitting atop the next higher card of the same suit; 50 points for each completed suit removed from the tableau (in which case you do not also score for the 12 cards sitting atop next higher cards). This yields a maximum score of 990.  If you win the game with 4 or more completed suits still in the tableau, add 2 points for each suit after the first three. Thus winning with all eight suits still in the tableau yields a score of 1000.[citation needed]
In the Windows versions of Spider Solitaire, the scoring is calculated with a starting score of 500. One point is subtracted for each move (including any use of an undo); 100 points are added for each in-suit stack completed.  This allows for a theoretical maximum score of 1254.[9]
Solvability[edit]
A detailed study has been done on the solvability of Spider solitaire games using software.[10]  Winning chances in a normal game with good play are considered to be about 1 in 3 games.[11]
References[edit]
^ "Spider" (p.431-432) in The Penguin Book of Card Games by David Parlett, Treasure Press, 1987. ISBN 1-85051-221-3
^ "Spider" (p.311) in Bicycle Official Rules of Card Games by Joli Quentin Kansil (ed.), 1999. ISBN 1-889752-06-1
^ "Spider Solitaire". Solitaired. Unwind Media. Retrieved 9 March 2021.
^ "Spider" (p.142) in The Playing Card Kit by Richard Craze, Simon & Schuster, 1995. ISBN 0-7318-0526-7
^ "Spiderette" (p.78-79) in The Little Book of Solitaire, Running Press, 2002. ISBN 0-7624-1381-6
^ "Spiderette Online Game". www.spiderette.com. Retrieved 13 January 2021.
^ 
"Consumer Companion for Windows 98 Offers Powerful New Utilities Desktop Themes and Exciting Games" (Press release). Microsoft Corporation. 25 June 1998. Retrieved 12 October 2010.
^ "Spider Solitaire Windows". www.spidersolitaire.co.uk. Retrieved 10 March 2023.
^ "Highest possible score Spider Solitaire". Goodsol Forum. Retrieved 23 June 2021.
^ Winnable Spider Solitaire Games, Tranzoa Co, 2020.
^ "Spider" (p.205) in Hoyle's Rules of Games (3rd edition) by Philip D. Morehead (ed.), 2001. ISBN 0-451-20484-0
See also[edit]
Simple Simon
Mrs. Mop
Solitaire terminology
List of solitaires
vtePatience or Solitaire by type - (list, glossary)Closed gamesSimple builders
Amazons
Auld Lang Syne
Birthday
The Clock
Clock
Cotillion (Contradance)
Leoni's Own
Musical (Betsy Ross, Fairest, Four Kings, Plus Belle, Quadruple Alliance)
Precedence
Quadrille (La Fran aise; Captive Queens)
Reserved builders
Carpet
Eagle Wing
Golf
Grand Duchess
Queen's/King's Audience
Matrimony
Monte Carlo
Moojub
Odd and Even
Patriarchs
Pyramid
Royal Cotillion
Royal Rendezvous
Sultan (Emperor of Germany)
Windmill
Simple packers
Batsford
Big Ben
British Constitution
British Square
Congress
Corona
Deauville
Deuces
Diplomat
Emperor
Following
Fortune's Favor
Four Seasons
Gargantua
Herring-Bone
Klondike
Napoleon at St Helena (Forty Thieves)
Napoleon's Square
Red and Black
Westcliff
Reserved packers
Acme
Alhambra
American Toad
Backbone
Canfield
Casket
Crazy Quilt
Duchess
Gate
The Plot
 Queen of Italy (Terrace)
Seven Devils
Closed non-builders
Accordion
Aces Up
Baroness (Five Piles, Thirteens)
Decade
Eight Cards
Elevens
Frustration
Good Thirteen
Herz zu Herz
Hit or Miss
Hope Deferred
Perpetual Motion (Narcotic)
Royal Flush
Royal Marriage
Travellers (Four of a Kind, Hidden Cards, Hide & Seek, Spoilt, Wandering Card)
Half-open gamesBuilders
Interregnum
Picture Gallery (Royal Parade)
Tournament
Virginia Reel
Blockades
Babette
British Blockade
Labyrinth
Planners
Calculation
Colorado
Colours
Cribbage Squares
Frog
Imaginary Thirteen
Jubilee
Poker Squares
Puss in the Corner
Rosamund's Bower
Sir Tommy
Packers
Agnes
Algerian
Blockade
Box Kite
Bristol
Four Corners
Heads And Tails
Intelligence
Martha
Miss Milligan
Mount Olympus
Pyramide
St. Helena
Stonewall
Yukon
Zodiac
Spiders
German Patience
Rouge et Noir
Scorpion
Simple Simon
Spider
Open gamesOpen builders
Archway
Black Hole
Crescent
Intrigue
Salic Law
Stalactites
Open packers
Baker's Dozen
Baker's Game
Beleaguered Castle
Bisley
Capricieuse
Eight Off
Flower Garden (Bouquet)
Fortress
FreeCell
Grandfather's Clock
House in the Woods
King Albert
La Belle Lucie
Mrs. Mop
P ckchen
Penguin
Persian
Russian
Seahaven Towers
Shamrocks
Open non-builders
Fourteen Out
 Gaps (Montana)
Gay Gordons (Exit)
Maze
Nestor
Competitive games
Australian Patience
Double Klondike (Double Solitaire)
Kings in the Corner
Nerts (Pounce, Racing Demon)
Russian Bank (Crapette)
Skip-Bo
Speed
Spite and Malice
Spit
Stress
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spider_(solitaire)&oldid=1143909099"