Positive displacement pump that uses a reciprocating membrane
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Diaphragm pump" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (November 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 The basic working principle of an air-operated double diaphragm pump.
 Cross-section sketch of diaphragm fuel pump
A diaphragm pump (also known as a Membrane pump) is a positive displacement pump that uses a combination of the reciprocating action of a rubber, thermoplastic or teflon diaphragm and suitable valves on either side of the diaphragm
(check valve, butterfly valves, flap valves, or any other form of shut-off valves) to pump a fluid.
There are three main types of diaphragm pumps:
Those in which the diaphragm is sealed with one side in the fluid to be pumped, and the other in air or hydraulic fluid. The diaphragm is flexed, causing the volume of the pump chamber to increase and decrease. A pair of non-return check valves prevent reverse flow of the fluid.[1]
Those employing volumetric positive displacement where the prime mover of the diaphragm is electro-mechanical, working through a crank or geared motor drive, or purely mechanical, such as with a lever or handle.  This method flexes the diaphragm through simple mechanical action, and one side of the diaphragm is open to air.[2]
Those employing one or more unsealed diaphragms with the fluid to be pumped on both sides. The diaphragm(s) again are flexed, causing the volume to change.
When the volume of a chamber of either type of pump is increased (the diaphragm moving up), the pressure decreases, and fluid is drawn into the chamber.[3] When the chamber pressure later increases from decreased volume (the diaphragm moving down), the fluid previously drawn in is forced out.[4] Finally, the diaphragm moving up once again draws fluid into the chamber, completing the cycle. This action is similar to that of the cylinder in an internal combustion engine. Diaphragm Pumps deliver a hermetic seal between the drive mechanism and the compression chamber, allowing the pump to transfer, compress, and evacuate the medium without a lubricant.
An elastomeric diaphragm can be used as a versatile dynamic seal that removes many of the limitations found with other sealing methods. They do not leak, offer little friction, and can be constructed for low pressure sensitivity. With the right material consideration, diaphragms can seal over a wide range of pressures and temperatures without needing lubrication or maintenance.
Characteristics[edit]
Diaphragm pump characteristics:
have good suction lift characteristics, some are low pressure pumps with low flow rates; others are capable of higher flow rates, dependent on the effective working diameter of the diaphragm and its stroke length.  They can handle sludges and slurries with a relatively high amount of grit and solid content.[5]
pump design separates pump fluids from potentially sensitive internal pump parts[6]
internal pump parts are often suspended and isolated within oil, to promote pump longevity
suitable for highly abrasive,[7] corrosive solutions[5]
suitable for discharge pressure up to 1,200 bar
have good dry running characteristics.
can be used to make artificial hearts.
are used to make air pumps for the filters on small fish tanks.
can be up to 97% efficient.
have good self priming capabilities.
can handle highly viscous liquids.[5] A viscosity correction chart can be used as a tool to help prevent under-sizing AOD pumps
CFD animation of a diaphragm pump
Double acting membrane pump on oil tanker deck
Membrane pump animation
Air compressors[edit]
Small mechanically activated diaphragm pumps are also used as air compressors and as a source of low-grade vacuum. Compared to other compressors, compressed ones are quiet, cheap and, most importantly, have no moving parts in the airstream. This allows them to be used without added lubrication in contact with the air, so the compressed air produced can be guaranteed clean.
References[edit]
^ Mechanical diaphragm pump
^ "Electric diaphragm pump". Archived from the original on 2011-10-09.
^ How AODD Pumps Work: Video
^ "Diaphragm Pump Technology (Air Dimensions, Inc.)". Archived from the original on 2014-04-07.
^ a b c "Advantages Of A Double Diaphragm Pump (Verder Liquids)". Retrieved 18 September 2022.
^ "Sprayer Pump Types, Costs, and Specifications". Sprayer Supplies. 2018-10-13. Retrieved 2018-11-21.
^ "Tools and Machinery of the Granite Industry, Part III". Dec 2006. Archived from the original on August 30, 2008.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diaphragm_pump&oldid=1147343061"