Roman road
This article is about the ancient Roman road. For other uses, see Appian Way (disambiguation).
Appian WayVia AppiaClick on the map for a fullscreen viewLocationRoman Forum, Rome to BrindisiCoordinates41 50 29 N 12 31 57 E  /  41.84139 N 12.53250 E  / 41.84139; 12.53250  (Appian Way)Coordinates: 41 50 29 N 12 31 57 E  /  41.84139 N 12.53250 E  / 41.84139; 12.53250  (Appian Way)TypeRoman roadHistoryBuilderAppius Claudius Caecus, addition by Trajan (Via Appia Traiana)Founded312 264 BCSite notesWebsitewww.camminodellappia.it 
The Appian Way (Latin and Italian: Via Appia) is one of the earliest and strategically most important Roman roads of the ancient republic. It connected Rome to Brindisi, in southeast Italy.[1] Its importance is indicated by its common name, recorded by Statius,[2][3] of Appia longarum...  regina viarum ("the Appian Way, the queen of the long roads").
The road is named after Appius Claudius Caecus,[4] the Roman censor who began and completed the first section as a military road to the south in 312 BC[5] during the Samnite Wars.
Origins[edit]
 Porta San Sebastiano is the gate of the Appia in the Aurelian Walls.
The need for roads[edit]
The Appian Way was a Roman road used as a main route for military supplies for its conquest of southern Italy in 312 BC and for improvements in communication.[6][7]
The Appian Way was the first long road built specifically to transport troops outside the smaller region of greater Rome (this was essential to the Romans). The few roads outside the early city were Etruscan and went mainly to Etruria. By the late Republic, the Romans had expanded over most of Italy and were masters of road construction. Their roads began at Rome, where the master itinerarium, or list of destinations along the roads, was located, and extended to the borders of their domain  hence the expression, "All roads lead to Rome".
The Samnite Wars[edit]
 Near Rome
Romans had an affinity for the people of Campania, who, like themselves, traced their backgrounds to the Etruscans. The Samnite Wars were instigated by the Samnites when Rome attempted to ally itself with the city of Capua in Campania. The Italic speakers in Latium had long ago been subdued and incorporated into the Roman state. They were responsible for changing Rome from a primarily Etruscan to a primarily Italic state.
Dense populations of sovereign Samnites remained in the mountains north of Capua, which is just north of the Greek city of Neapolis. Around 343 BC, Rome and Capua attempted to form an alliance. The Samnites reacted with military force.[citation needed]
The barrier of the Pontine Marshes[edit]
 Tomb of Priscilla.
 Grave monument of Caius Rabirius Postumus Hermodorus, Lucia Rabiria Demaris and Usia Prima, priestess of Isis along the Via Appia, near Quarto Miglio
 San Sebastiano fuori le Mura, located on the catacombs of San Sebastiano
Between Capua and Rome lay the Pontine Marshes (Pomptinae paludes), a swamp infested with malaria. A tortuous coastal road wound between Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber and Neapolis. The Via Latina followed its ancient and scarcely more accessible path along the foothills of Monti Laziali and Monti Lepini, which are visible towering over the former marsh.
In the First Samnite War (343 341 BC) the Romans found they could not support or resupply troops in the field against the Samnites across the marsh. A revolt of the Latin League drained their resources further. They gave up the attempted alliance and settled with Samnium.
Colonization to the southeast[edit]
The Romans were only biding their time while they looked for a solution. The first answer was the colonia, a "cultivation" of settlers from Rome, who would maintain a permanent base of operations. The Second Samnite War (327 304 BC) erupted when Rome attempted to place a colony at Cales in 334 BC and again at Fregellae in 328 BC on the other side of the marshes. The Samnites, now a major power after defeating the Greeks of Tarentum, occupied Neapolis to try to ensure its loyalty. The Neapolitans appealed to Rome, which sent an army and expelled the Samnites from Neapolis.
Appius Claudius' beginning of the works[edit]
In 312 BC, Appius Claudius Caecus became censor at Rome. He was of the gens Claudia, who were patricians descended from the Sabines taken into the early Roman state. He had been given the name of the founding ancestor of the gens, Appius Claudius (Attus Clausus in Sabine). He was a populist, i.e., an advocate of the common people. A man of inner perspicacity, in the years of success he was said to have lost his outer vision and thus acquired the name caecus, "blind".
Without waiting to be told what to do by the Senate, Appius Claudius began bold public works to address the supply problem. An aqueduct (the Aqua Appia) secured the water supply of the city of Rome. By far the best known project was the road, which ran across the Pontine Marshes to the coast northwest of Naples, where it turned north to Capua. On it, any number of fresh troops could be sped to the theatre of operations, and supplies could be moved en masse to Roman bases without hindrance by either enemy or terrain. It is no surprise that, after his term as censor, Appius Claudius became consul twice, subsequently held other offices, and was a respected consultant to the state even during his later years.
The success of the road[edit]
The road achieved its purpose. The outcome of the Second Samnite War was at last favorable to Rome.  In a series of blows the Romans reversed their fortunes, bringing Etruria to the table in 311 BC, the very year of their revolt, and Samnium in 304 BC. The road was the main factor that allowed them to concentrate their forces with sufficient rapidity and to keep them adequately supplied, whereafter they became a formidable opponent.
Construction of the road[edit]
 The path of the Via Appia and of the Via Appia Traiana
The main part of the Appian Way was started and finished in 312 BC.
The road began as a leveled dirt road upon which small stones and mortar were laid. Gravel was laid upon this, which was finally topped with tight fitting, interlocking stones to provide a flat surface. The historian Procopius said that the stones fit together so securely and closely that they appeared to have grown together rather than to have been fitted together.[8] The road was cambered in the middle (for water runoff) and had ditches on either side of the road which were protected by retaining walls.
Between Rome and Lake Albano[edit]
 The Circus of Maxentius.
The road began in the Forum Romanum, passed through the Servian Wall at the porta Capena, went through a cutting in the clivus Martis, and left the city. For this stretch of the road, the builders used the Via Latina. The building of the Aurelian Wall centuries later required the placing of another gate, the Porta Appia. Outside of Rome the new Via Appia went through well-to-do suburbs along the Via Norba, the ancient track to the Alban hills, where Norba was situated. The road at the time was a via glarea, a gravel road. The Romans built a high-quality road, with layers of cemented stone over a layer of small stones, cambered, drainage ditches on either side, low retaining walls on sunken portions, and dirt pathways for sidewalks. The Via Appia is believed to have been the first Roman road to feature the use of lime cement. The materials were volcanic rock. The surface was said to have been so smooth that you could not distinguish the joints. The Roman section still exists and is lined with monuments of all periods, although the cement has eroded out of the joints, leaving a very rough surface.
Across the marsh[edit]
The road concedes nothing to the Alban hills, but goes straight through them over cuts and fills. The gradients are steep. Then it enters the former Pontine Marshes. A stone causeway of about 31 kilometers (19 mi) led across stagnant and foul-smelling pools blocked from the sea by sand dunes. Appius Claudius planned to drain the marsh, taking up earlier attempts, but he failed. The causeway and its bridges subsequently needed constant repair. In 162 BC, Marcus Cornelius Cathegus had a canal constructed along the road to relieve the traffic and provide an alternative when the road was being repaired. Romans preferred using the canal.[citation needed]
 Tomb of Caecilia Metella and the castrum Caetani
Along the coast[edit]
The Via Appia picked up the coastal road at Tarracina  (Terracina). However, the Romans straightened it somewhat with cuttings, which form cliffs today. From there the road swerved north to Capua, where, for the time being, it ended. Caudine Forks was not far to the north. The itinerary was Aricia (Ariccia), Tres Tabernae, Forum Appii, Tarracina, Fundi (Fondi), Formiae (Formia), Minturnae (Minturno), Suessa, Casilinum and Capua, but some of these were colonies added after the Samnite Wars. The distance was 212 kilometers (132 mi). The original road had no milestones, as they were not yet in use. A few survive from later times, including a first milestone near the porta Appia.
Extension to Beneventum[edit]
 Via Appia within the ancient Minturno
The Third Samnite War (298 290 BC) is perhaps misnamed. It was an all-out attempt by all the neighbors of Rome: Italics, Etruscans and Gauls, to check the power of Rome. The Samnites were the leading people of the conspiracy. Rome dealt the northerners a crushing blow at the Battle of Sentinum in Umbria in 295. The Samnites fought on alone. Rome now placed 13 colonies in Campania and Samnium. It must have been during this time that they extended the Via Appia 35 miles beyond Capua past the Caudine forks to a place the Samnites called Maloenton, "passage of the flocks". The itinerary added Calatia, Caudium and Beneventum (not yet called that).[9] Here also ended the Via Latina.[10]
Extension to Apulia and Calabria[edit]
By 290 BC, the sovereignty of the Samnites had ended. The heel of Italy lay open to the Romans. The dates are somewhat uncertain and there is considerable variation in the sources, but during the Third Samnite War the Romans seem to have extended the road to Venusia, where they placed a colony of 20,000 men. After that they were at Tarentum.
Roman expansion alarmed Tarentum, the leading city of the Greek presence (Magna Graecia) in southern Italy.  They hired the mercenary, King Pyrrhus of Epirus, in neighboring Greece to fight the Romans on their behalf. In 280 BC the Romans suffered a defeat at the hands of Pyrrhus at the Battle of Heraclea on the coast west of Tarentum. The battle was costly for both sides, prompting Pyrrhus to remark "One more such victory and I am lost."  Making the best of it, the Roman army turned on Greek Rhegium and effected a massacre of Pyrrhian partisans there.
Rather than pursue them, Pyrrhus went straight for Rome along the Via Appia and then the Via Latina. He knew that if he continued on the Via Appia he could be trapped in the marsh. Wary of such entrapment on the Via Latina also, he withdrew without fighting after encountering opposition at Anagni. Wintering in Campania, he withdrew to Apulia in 279 BC, where, pursued by the Romans, he won a second costly victory at the Battle of Asculum. Withdrawing from Apulia for a Sicilian interlude, he returned to Apulia in 275 BC and started for Campania up the Roman road.
Supplied by that same road, the Romans successfully defended the region against Pyrrhus, crushing his army in a two-day fight at the Battle of Beneventum in 275 BC.  The Romans renamed the town from "Maleventum" ("site of bad events") to Beneventum ("site of good events") as a result.  Pyrrhus withdrew to Greece, where he died in a street fight in Argos in 272 BC.  Tarentum fell to the Romans that same year, who proceeded to consolidate their rule over all of Italy.[11]
The Romans pushed the Via Appia to the port of Brundisium in 264 BC. The itinerary from Beneventum was now Venusia, Silvium, Tarentum, Uria and Brundisium. The Roman Republic was the government of Italy, for the time being. Appius Claudius died in 273, but in extending the road a number of times, no one has tried to displace his name upon it.
Rediscovery[edit]
The Appian Way's path across today's regions Lazio and Campania has always been well known, while the exact position of the part located in Apulia (the original one, not the extension by Trajan) was unknown, since there were no visible remains of the Appian Way in that region.[12][13]
In the first half of the 20th century, the professor of ancient Roman topography Giuseppe Lugli managed to discover, with the then innovative technique of photogrammetry, what probably was the route of the Appian Way from Gravina in Puglia (Silvium) up to Taranto. When analysing aerophotogrammetric shots of the area, Lugli noticed a path (Italian: tratturo) named la Tarantina, whose direction was still largely influenced by the centuriation; this, according to Lugli, was the path of the Appian Way. This path, as well as the part located in today's Apulia region, was still in use in the Middle Ages. A further piece of evidence for Lugli's proposed path is the presence of a number of archaeological remains in that region, among them the ancient settlement of Jesce.[14][15]
By studying the distances given in the Antonine Itinerary, Lugli also assigned the Appian Way stations Blera and Sublupatia (which also occurs on the Tabula Peutingeriana) respectively to the areas Murgia Catena and Taverna (between masseria (estate farmhouse) S. Filippo and masseria S. Pietro). However, the toponym Murgia Catena defined too large an area, so that it didn't allow a clear localization of the Appian Way station. Recently Luciano Piepoli, based on the distances given in the Antonine Itinerary and on recent archeological findings, has suggested that Silvium should be Santo Staso, an area very close to Gravina in Puglia, Blera should be masseria Castello, and Sublupatia should be masseria Caione.[16][17]
Extension by Trajan[edit]
The emperor Trajan built the Via Traiana, an extension of the Via Appia from Beneventum, reaching Brundisium via Canusium and Barium rather than via Tarentum.  This was commemorated by an arch at Beneventum.
Travellers could cross the Adriatic Sea through the Otranto Strait towards Albania either by landing at present day Durr s through the Via Egnatia or near the ancient town of Apollonia and continue towards present day Rrogozhina in central Albania.[18]
Notable historical events along the road[edit]
The crucifixion of Spartacus' army[edit]
 Emperor Trajan built a deviation of Via Appia. This is a tract of Via Appia Traiana near Egnatia.
 The column in Brindisi, marking the end of the Via Appia
Further information: Third Servile War
In 73 BC, a slave revolt (known as the Third Servile War) under the ex-gladiator of Capua, Spartacus, began against the Romans. Slavery accounted for roughly every third person in Italy.
Spartacus defeated many Roman armies in a conflict that lasted for over two years. While trying to escape from Italy at Brundisium he unwittingly moved his forces into the historic trap at Apulia in Calabria.[clarification needed] The Romans were well acquainted with the region. Legions were brought home from abroad and Spartacus was pinned between armies. The ex-slave army was defeated at the Siler River by Marcus Licinius Crassus. Pompey's armies captured and killed several thousand rebels that escaped from the battle and Crassus captured several thousand more. The Romans judged that the slaves had forfeited their right to live. In 71 BC, 6,000 slaves were crucified along the 200-kilometer (120 mi) Via Appia from Rome to Capua.[19]
The World War II Battle of Anzio[edit]
Main article: Battle of Anzio
In 1943, during World War II, the Allies fell into the same trap Pyrrhus had retreated to avoid, in the Pomptine fields, the successor to the Pomptine marshes. The marsh remained, despite many efforts to drain it, until engineers working for Benito Mussolini finally succeeded. (Even so, the fields were infested with malarial mosquitos until the advent of DDT in the 1950s.)
Hoping to break a stalemate at Monte Cassino, the Allies landed on the coast of Italy at the Anzio-Nettuno area - ancient Antium - which was midway between Ostia and Terracina. They found that the place was undefended. They intended to move along the line of the Via Appia to take Rome, outflanking Monte Cassino, but they did not do so quickly enough. The Germans occupied Mounts Laziali and Lepini along the track of the old Via Latina, from which they rained down shells on Anzio. Even though the Allies expanded into all the Pomptine region, they gained no ground. The Germans counterattacked down the via Appia from the Alban hills in a front four miles wide, but could not retake Anzio. The battle lasted for four months, one side being supplied by sea, the other by land through Rome. In May 1944, the Allies broke out of Anzio and took Rome. The German forces escaped to the north of Florence.
1960 Summer Olympics[edit]
For the 1960 Summer Olympics, it served as part of the men's marathon course that was won by Abebe Bikila of Ethiopia.[20][21]
Main sights[edit]
 Via Appia Antica 4.1 km South-East from Porta Appia (Porta San Sebastiano), the gate of the Aurelian Walls
Via Appia antica[edit]
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the road fell out of use; Pope Pius VI ordered its restoration. A new Appian Way was built in parallel with the old one in 1784 as far as the Alban Hills region. The new road is the Via Appia Nuova ("New Appian Way") as opposed to the old section, now known as Via Appia Antica. The old Appian Way close to Rome is now a free tourist attraction. It was extensively restored for Rome's Millennium and Great Jubilee celebrations. The first 5 kilometers (3 mi) are still heavily used by cars, buses and coaches but from then on traffic is very light and the ruins can be explored on foot in relative safety. The Church of Domine Quo Vadis is in the second mile of the road. Along or close to the part of the road closest to Rome, there are three catacombs of Roman and early Christian origin and one of Jewish origin.
The construction of Rome's ring road, the Grande Raccordo Anulare or GRA, in 1951 caused the Appian Way to be cut in two. More recent improvements to the GRA have rectified this through the construction of a tunnel under the Appia, so that it is now possible to follow the Appia on foot for about 16 km (10 mi) from its beginning near the Baths of Caracalla.
Many parts of the original road beyond Rome's environs have been preserved, and some are now used by cars (for example, in the area of Velletri). The road inspires the last movement of Ottorino Respighi's Pini di Roma. To this day the Via Appia contains the longest stretch of straight road in Europe,[22] totaling 62 km (39 mi).
Monuments along the Via Appia[edit]
 The Appian Way as it appeared in Piranesi's imagination (1756)
1st to 4th mile[edit]
Porta Appia (Porta San Sebastiano), the gate of the Aurelian Walls
Church of Domine Quo Vadis
Tomb of Priscilla
Catacomb of Callixtus
Hypogeum of Vibia
San Sebastiano fuori le mura
Catacombs of St Sebastian
Vigna Randanini Jewish catacombs
Circus of Maxentius
Tomb of Caecilia Metella
Roman baths of Capo di Bove
Tomb of Hilarus Fuscus
5th mile[edit]
 The Mausoleum of the Curiazi has been dated to between the end of the Republic and the beginning of the Empire
Mausoleum of the Orazi and Curiazi
Villa dei Quintili, with nympheum, theatre, and baths
Mausoleum of Casal Rotondo
 Torre Selce, a 12th-century tower built on a much older mausoleum
6th mile and beyond[edit]
Minucia tomb
Torre Selce
Temple of Hercules
Berrettia di Prete (tomb and later church)
Mausoleum of Gallienus
Tres Tabernae
Villa of Publius Clodius Pulcher (in the Villa Santa Caterina, owned by the Pontifical North American College), 14th mile
Villa of Pompey
Roman bridges along the road[edit]
Further information: List of Roman bridges
There are the remains of several Roman bridges along the road, including the Ponte di Tre Ponti, Ponte di Vigna Capoccio, Viadotta di Valle Ariccia, Ponte Alto and Ponte Antico.
See also[edit]
Appian Way Regional Park
Park of the Caffarella which borders the northern side of the Appian Way
Roman bridge
Roman engineering
Three Taverns
The Pines of the Appian Way, a movement of Ottorino Respighi's tone poem Pines of Rome
References[edit]
^ Quilici and S. Quilici Gigli, L., R. Talbert, S. Gillies, T. Elliott, J. Becker. "Places: 356966898 (Via Appia)". Pleiades. Retrieved 14 March 2013.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)
^ Silvae, 2.2.
^ Povoledo, Elisabetta (5 April 2008). "Past Catches Up With the Queen of Roads". New York Times. Retrieved 5 April 2008. In ancient times the Appian Way, which links Rome to the southern city of Brindisi, was known as the regina viarum, the queen of the roads. But these days its crown appears to be tarnished by chronic traffic congestion, vandalism and, some of its guardians grumble, illegal development.
^ "The Appian Way is still a good military road". Lewiston Morning Tribune. (Idaho). Associated Press. 4 June 1944. p. 4, section 2.
^ "Appian Way" in Chambers's Encyclop dia. London: George Newnes, 1961, Vol. 1, p. 490.
^ William Smith, Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (London, 1854), 1288. [1]
^ Rodgers, Nigel (2008). Roman Empire. New York, USA: Metro Books. p. 116. ISBN 978-1-4351-0455-6.
^ Tingay, G.I.F., and J. Badcock. These Were The Romans. ed. Chester Springs, Pennsylvania: Dufour Editions, Inc., 1989.
^ William Smith, Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (London, 1854), 1292 93. [2]
^ William Smith, Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (London, 1854), 1303. [3]
^ See The Harper Encyclopedia of Military History, p. 66
^ lugli-orientate
^ piepoli-2014
^ lugli-orientate
^ piepoli-2014
^ lugli-orientate
^ piepoli-2014
^ Elsie, Robert (2010). Historical Dictionary of Albania. ISBN 978-0810873803.
^ Appian, Civil Wars, 1.120.
^ 1960 Summer Olympics official report. Archived 31 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine Volume 1. pp. 80 81.
^ 1960 Summer Olympics official report. Archived 27 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine Volume 2. Part 1. pp. 117 18.
^ Magli, Giulio (2007). "Astronomical references in the planning of ancient roads". arXiv:0706.1325 [physics.hist-ph].
Bibliography[edit]
Berechman, Joseph. 2003. "Transportation Economic Aspects of Roman Highway Development: The Case of Via Appia." Transportation Research Part A 37, no. 5: 453 78.
Coarelli, Filippo. 2007. Rome and environs: An archaeological guide. Translated by James J. Clauss and Daniel P. Harmon. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.
Della Portella, Ivana. 2004. The Appian Way: From Its Foundation to the Middle Ages. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum.
Dubbini, Rachele. 2016. "A New Republican Temple on the Via Appia, at the Borders of Rome's Urban Space." Journal of Roman Archaeology 29: 327 47.
Kleijn, M. de, R. de Hond, and O. Martinez-Rubi. 2016. "A 3D Spatial Data Infrastructure for Mapping the Via Appia." Digital Applications in Archaeology and Cultural Heritage 3: 23 32.
Magli, Giulio, Eugenio Realini, Mirko Reguzzoni, and Daniele Sampietro. 2014. "Uncovering a Masterpiece of Roman Engineering: The Project of Via Appia between Colle Pardo and Terracina." Journal of Cultural Heritage 15, no. 6: 665 69.
Peterson, John. 2015.  "Modelling Roman surveying in the Pontine plain."  1st International Conference on Metrology for Archaeology Benevento, Italy, 22 23 October 2015 445 9.
Luciano Piepoli (2014). "Il percorso della via Appia antica nell'Apulia et Calabria: stato dell'arte e nuove acquisizioni sul tratto Gravina-Taranto". Vetera Christianorum (in Italian) (51): 239 261.
Giuseppe Lugli. La via Appia attraverso l'Apulia e un singolare gruppo di strade "orientate" (PDF) (in Italian). Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 December 2021.
Smith, William (1854). Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography. London.
External links[edit]
Library resources about  Appian Way 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Official website 
Appian Way Regional Park
Ivana Della Portella, Giuseppina Pisani Sartorio, Francesca Ventre. The Appian Way: From Its Foundation to the Middle Ages. Los Angeles, 2004 (Google Books Preview).
Via Appia Antica From Torre In Selci To Frattocchie
Via Appia Antica From Cecilia Metella To Torre In Selci
The Via Appia And The Cities Of The Pontine Plain
Documentary Film about the Sassi di Matera and the Appian Way, Roba Forestiera, 44 min., 2004
New York Times article on condition of Appian Way in modern times
Omnes Viae: Via Appia on the Tabula Peutingeriana
Robert Kaster's "Advice for the Traveler" excerpted from The Appian Way: Ghost Road, Queen of Roads
 Media related to Via Appia at Wikimedia Commons
vteRoman roads
Via Aemilia
Via Aemilia Scauri
Via Agrippa
Via Amerina
Via Anicia
Via Annia
Via Appia
Via Aquillia
Via Aquitania
Via Ardeatina
Via Argentaria
Via Asinaria
Via Asturica Burdigalam
Via Augusta
Via Augusta Pretoria
Via Aurelia
Via Bracara Asturicam
Via Caecilia
Via Campana
Via Cassia
Via Claudia Augusta
Via Claudia Nova
Via Clodia
Via Confluentana
Via Cornelia
Via Corsica
Via Decia
Via Delapidata
Via Devana
Strata Diocletiana
Via Domitia
Via Domiziana
Via Egnatia
Via Fenollentis
Via Flacca
Via Flaminia
Via Flavia
Via Gallica
Via Gemina
Via Hadriana
Via Julia Augusta
Via Labicana
Via Latina
Via Laurentina
Via Lusitanorum
Via Maris
Via Militaris
Via Nomentana
Via Ostiensis
Via Pontica
Via Popilia
Via Portuensis
Via Praenestina
Via Postumia
Via Regina
Via Salaria
Via Severiana
Via Sublacensis
Via Traiana
Via Traiana Nova
Via Trionfale
Via Valeria
Via Vallespiri
Via Vitellia
Via XVIII
vte Venues of the 1960 Summer Olympics (Rome)
Acqua Santa Golf Club Course
Arch of Constantine
Basilica of Maxentius
Baths of Caracalla
Campo Tre Fontane
Cesano Infantry School Range
Florence Communal Stadium
Grosseto Communal Stadium
Gulf of Naples
L'Aquila Communal Stadium
Lake Albano
Lazio Pigeon Shooting Stand
Livorno Ardenza Stadium
Naples Saint Paul's Stadium
Olympic Velodrome
Palazzo dei Congressi
Palazzo dello Sport
Palazzetto dello sport
Passo Corese
Pescara Adriatic Stadium
Piazza di Siena
Piscina delle Rose
Pratoni del Vivaro
Raccordo Anulare
Stadio dei Marmi
Stadio Flaminio
Stadio Olimpico
Stadio Olimpico del Nuoto
Umberto I Shooting Range
Via Appia Antica
Via Cassia
Via Flaminia
Via Cristoforo Colombo
Via di Grottarossa
vteOlympic venues in athletics19th century
1896: Marathon (city), Panathenaic Stadium
20th century
1900: Croix-Catelan Stadium
1904: Francis Field
1908: White City Stadium
1912: Stockholm Olympic Stadium
1920: Olympisch Stadion
1924: Stade Yves-du-Manoir
1928: Olympic Stadium
1932: Olympic Stadium, Riverside Drive at Griffith Park
1936: Avus Motor Road, Olympic Stadium
1948: Empire Stadium
1952: Olympic Stadium
1956: Melbourne Cricket Ground
1960: Arch of Constantine, Raccordo Anulare, Stadio Olimpico, Via Appia Antica, Via Cristoforo Colombo
1964: Fuchu City, Karasuyama-machi, National Stadium, Sasazuka-machi, Shinjuku
1968: Estadio Ol mpico Universitario, Z calo
1972: Olympiastadion
1976: Montreal Botanical Garden, Olympic Stadium, Streets of Montreal
1980: Grand Arena, Streets of Moscow
1984: Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, Santa Monica College, Streets of Los Angeles, Streets of Santa Monica
1988: Seoul Olympic Stadium, Streets of Seoul
1992: Estadi Ol mpic de Monju c, Marathon course, Matar , Walking course
1996: Marathon course, Olympic Stadium, Walking course
21st century
2000: Marathon course, North Sydney, Olympic Stadium
2004: Marathon (city), Olympic Stadium, Panathenaic Stadium, Stadium at Olympia
2008: Beijing National Stadium, Olympic Green Promenade Walking course, Streets of Beijing Marathon course
2012: Marathon Course, Olympic Stadium
2016: Est dio Ol mpico Jo o Havelange, Pontal, Samb dromo
2020: Japan National Stadium, Odori Park
2024: Stade de France, Champs- lys es
2028: Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, BMO Stadium, Grand Park
2032: Brisbane Cricket Ground
Preceded bySpanish Steps
Landmarks of RomeAppian Way
Succeeded byCampo de' Fiori
vteLandmarks of RomeWalls and gates
Aurelian Walls
Ardeatina
Asinaria
Latina
Maggiore
Metronia
Nomentana
Pia
Pinciana
Popolo
Portese
San Pancrazio
San Paolo
San Giovanni
San Sebastiano
Settimiana
Tiburtina
Leonine Wall
Cavalleggeri
Pertusa
Santo Spirito
Castra Praetoria
Janiculum Wall
Terreus Wall
Romuli Wall
Servian Wall
Caelimontana
Dolabella
Gallienus
Esquilina
Ancient obelisks
Lateran Obelisk
Flaminian Obelisk
Obelisk of Minerveo
Obelisk of Montecitorio
Ancient RomanlandmarksTriumphal arches
Arch of Constantine
Arch of Dolabella
Arch of Drusus
Arch of Gallienus
Arch of Janus
Arch of Septimius Severus
Arch of Titus
Arcus Novus
Aqueducts
Aqua Alexandrina
Aqua Anio Vetus
Aqua Claudia
Cloaca Maxima
Public baths
Baths of Agrippa
Baths of Caracalla
Baths of Diocletian
Baths of Nero
Baths of Trajan
Religious
Ara Pacis
Temple of Antoninus and Faustina
Temple of Apollo Palatinus
Temple of Apollo Sosianus
Temple of Hadrian
Temple of Hercules Victor
Temple of Janus
Temple of Minerva Medica
Temple of Portunus
Temple of Saturn
Temple of Vesta
House of the Vestals
Largo di Torre Argentina
Lupercal
Pantheon
Porta Maggiore Basilica
Fora
Roman Forum
Imperial fora
Forum of Augustus
Forum of Caesar
Forum of Nerva
Forum of Vespasian
Trajan's Forum
Forum Boarium
Forum Holitorium
Civic
Basilica Argentaria
Basilica Julia
Basilica of Junius Bassus
Basilica of Maxentius
Basilica of Neptune
Basilica Ulpia
Comitium
Curia Julia
Portico Dii Consentes
Porticus Octaviae
Tabularium
Entertainment
Circus Maximus
Circus of Maxentius
Circus of Nero
Colosseum
Ludus Magnus
Gardens of Maecenas
Gardens of Sallust
Stadium of Domitian
Theatre of Marcellus
Theatre of Pompey
Palaces and villae
Domus Augustana
Domus Aurea
Domus Transitoria
Flavian Palace
House of Augustus
Palace of Domitian
Villa Gordiani
Villa of Livia
Insula dell'Ara Coeli
Villa of the Quintilii
Villa of the sette bassi
Column monuments
Column of Antoninus Pius
Column of Marcus Aurelius
"Column of Phocas"
Trajan's Column
Five-Columns Monument
Commerce
Porticus Aemilia
Trajan's Market
Tombs
Casal Rotondo
Catacombs of Domitilla
Catacombs of Rome
Catacombs of San Sebastiano
Columbarium of Pomponius Hylas
Mausoleum of Augustus
Mausoleum of Helena
Mausoleum of Maxentius
Pyramid of Cestius
Tomb of Eurysaces the Baker
Tomb of Hilarus Fuscus
Tomb of the Haterii
Tomb of the Scipios
Tombs of Via Latina
Tomb of Priscilla
Vigna Randanini
Bridges
Pons Cestius
Pons Fabricius
Ponte Milvio
Ponte Sant'Angelo
Roman CatholicBasilicas
Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran
Basilica of Saint Mary Major
Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls
S. Lorenzo fuori le mura
S. Agnese fuori le mura
S. Agostino
S. Anastasia al Palatino
S. Andrea delle Fratte
S. Andrea della Valle
S. Antonio da Padova in Via Merulana
S. Apollinare alle Terme
Ss. Apostoli
S. Balbina
S. Bartolomeo all'Isola
Ss. Bonifacio ed Alessio
S. Camillo de Lellis
S. Carlo al Corso
S. Cecilia in Trastevere
Ss. Celso e Giuliano
S. Clemente
Ss. Cosma e Damiano
S. Crisogono
S. Croce in Via Flaminia
S. Croce in Gerusalemme
S. Eugenio
S. Eustachio
S. Francesca Romana
 S. Giovanni a Porta Latina
S. Giovanni dei Fiorentini
Ss. Giovanni e Paolo
S. Lorenzo in Damaso
S. Lorenzo in Lucina
S. Maria Ausiliatrice
S. Marco
S. Maria degli Angeli
S. Maria in Montesanto
S. Maria in Cosmedin
S. Maria in Domnica
S. Maria in Aracoeli
S. Maria del Popolo
S. Maria sopra Minerva
S. Maria in Trastevere
S. Maria in Via
S. Maria in Via Lata
S. Maria della Vittoria
S. Martino ai Monti
Ss. Nereo e Achilleo
S. Nicola in Carcere
S. Pancrazio
Pantheon
S. Pietro in Vincoli
S. Prassede
S. Pudenziana
Ss. Quattro Coronati
S. Saba
S. Sabina
Sacro Cuore di Maria
Sacro Cuore di Cristo Re
Sacro Cuore di Ges  a Castro Pretorio
S. Sebastiano fuori le mura
S. Silvestro in Capite
S. Sisto Vecchio
S. Sofia a Via Boccea
S. Stefano Rotondo
S. Teresa
S. Vitale
Other churches
List of churches in Rome
Castles and palaces
Arx
Casa dei Cavalieri di Rodi
Castel Sant'Angelo
Domus Internationalis Paulus VI
Palazzo Aragona Gonzaga
Palazzo Barberini
Palazzo Borghese
Palazzo della Cancelleria
Palazzo Chigi
Palazzo Colonna
Palazzo della Consulta
Palazzo Farnese
Palazzo Fusconi-Pighini
Palazzo Giustinani
Lateran Palace
Palazzo Madama
Palazzo Malta
Palazzo di Giustizia
Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne
Palazzo Mattei
Palazzo del Quirinale
Palazzo Pamphilj
Palazzo Poli
Palazzo Riario
Palazzo Ruspoli
Palazzo Spada
Palazzo Valentini
Palazzo Vidoni-Caffarelli
Palazzo del Viminale
Palazzo Wedekind
Palazzo Zuccari
Villa Farnesina
Villa Giulia
Villa Madama
Fountains
Api
Acqua Felice
Acqua Paola
Babuino
Barcaccia
Il Facchino
Marforio
Moro
Nasone
Navicella
Neptune
Nettuno
del Pantheon
Pianto
di Piazza d'Aracoeli
di Piazza Colonna
di Piazza Farnese
della Piazza dei Quiriti
di Piazza Nicosia
in Piazza Santa Maria in Trastevere
di Ponte Sisto
Quattro Fiumi
Quattro Fontane
Tartarughe
Trevi Fountain
Tritons
Tritone
Other landmarks
Altare della Patria (Tomb of the Unknown Soldier of Italy)
Campo Verano
Capocci Tower
Column of the Immaculate Conception
Conti Tower
Hospital of the Holy Spirit
Milizie Tower
Sisto Bridge
Spanish Steps
Squares, streetsand public spaces
Appian Way
Campo de' Fiori
Clivus Capitolinus
Piazza Colonna
Piazza d'Aracoeli
Piazza del Popolo
Piazza della Minerva
Piazza della Repubblica
Piazza Farnese
Piazza Navona
Piazza di Spagna
Piazza Venezia
Via dei Coronari
Via del Corso
Via della Conciliazione
Via dei Fori Imperiali
Via Sacra
Via Veneto
Parks, gardensand zoos
Bioparco
Villa Ada
Villa Borghese gardens
Villa Doria Pamphili
Villa Medici
Villa Torlonia
Parco degli Acquedotti
Museums andart galleries
Boncompagni Ludovisi Decorative Art Museum
Capitoline Museums
Casa di Goethe
Doria Pamphilj Gallery
Galleria Borghese
 Galleria Comunale d'Arte Moderna
Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Antica
Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna
Giorgio de Chirico House Museum
Galleria Spada
Jewish Museum of Rome
Keats Shelley Memorial House
MAXXI
Museo Archeologico Ostiense
Museo Barracco di Scultura Antica
Museo Civico di Zoologia
Museo delle anime del Purgatorio
Museo delle Mura
Museo di Roma
Museo di Roma in Trastevere
Museo nazionale del Palazzo di Venezia
Museo Nazionale Etrusco
Museo Nazionale Romano
Museo Storico Nazionale dell'Arte Sanitaria
Museum of Contemporary Art of Rome
Museum of Roman Civilization
Museum of the Ara Pacis
Museum of the Liberation of Rome
National Museum of Oriental Art
Palazzo Colonna
Palazzo delle Esposizioni
Pigorini National Museum
Porta San Paolo Railway Museum
Santa Cecilia Musical Instruments Museum
Venanzo Crocetti Museum
Art
Apollo Belvedere
Augustus of Prima Porta
Colossus of Constantine
La Bocca della Verit 
Laoco n and His Sons
Ludovisi Battle sarcophagus
Ecstasy of Saint Teresa
Portonaccio sarcophagus
Raphael Rooms
Sistine Chapel ceiling
Velletri Sarcophagus
LandscapeSeven Hills
Aventine
Caelian
Capitoline
Esquiline
Palatine
Quirinal
Viminal
Tiber Island
Monte Testaccio
Metropolitan Cityof Rome Capital
Appian Way Regional Park
Capo di Bove
Castello Orsini-Odescalchi
Frascati
Hadrian's Villa
Ostia Antica
Villa Aldobrandini
Villa d'Este
Villa Farnese
Events and traditions
Festa della Repubblica
Rome Quadriennale
Rome Film Festival
Related
Vatican City
St. Peter's Basilica
St. Peter's Square
Sistine Chapel
ceiling
Authority control National
Germany
Czech Republic
Geographic
Pleiades
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Appian_Way&oldid=1144623078"