President of the United States from 1945 to 1953
"Harry Truman" redirects here. For other uses, see Harry Truman (disambiguation).
Harry S. TrumanOfficial portrait, c. 194733rd President of the United StatesIn officeApril 12, 1945  January 20, 1953Vice President
None (1945 1949)[a]
Alben W. Barkley (1949 1953)
Preceded byFranklin D. RooseveltSucceeded byDwight D. Eisenhower34th Vice President of the United StatesIn officeJanuary 20, 1945  April 12, 1945PresidentFranklin D. RooseveltPreceded byHenry A. WallaceSucceeded byAlben W. BarkleyUnited States Senatorfrom MissouriIn officeJanuary 3, 1935  January 17, 1945Preceded byRoscoe C. PattersonSucceeded byFrank P. BriggsPresiding Judge of Jackson County, MissouriIn officeJanuary 1, 1927[1]  January 1, 1935[1]Preceded byElihu W. Hayes[2]Succeeded byEugene I. Purcell[3]Judge of Jackson County, Missouri's Eastern DistrictIn officeJanuary 1, 1923[4]  January 1, 1925[4]Preceded byJames E. Gilday[5]Succeeded byHenry Rummel[3]
Personal detailsBorn(1884-05-08)May 8, 1884Lamar, Missouri, U.S.DiedDecember 26, 1972(1972-12-26) (aged 88)Kansas City, Missouri, U.S.Resting placeHarry S. Truman Presidential Library and MuseumPolitical partyDemocraticSpouseBess Wallace  (m. 1919) ChildrenMargaretParents
John Anderson Truman
Martha Ellen Young
OccupationPoliticianhaberdasherfarmerSignatureMilitary serviceBranch/serviceUnited States ArmyYears of service
1905 1911 (National Guard)
1917 1919 (Army)
1920 1953 (Army Reserve)
RankColonel (Army Reserve)CommandsBattery D, 129th Field Artillery Regiment, 35th Division1st Battalion, 379th Field Artillery Regiment, 102nd Infantry Division379th Field Artillery Regiment, 102nd Infantry DivisionBattles
World War I
St. Mihiel
Meuse Argonne
Defensive Sector
Awards
World War I Victory Medal
Armed Forces Reserve Medal (2)
Harry S. Truman's voice
Excerpt from a radio broadcast regarding the Potsdam ConferenceRecorded November 1948
This article is part of a series aboutHarry S. Truman
Early life
Electoral history
Assassination attempt
Legacy
Truman Day
Scholarship
USS Harry S. Truman
Truman Reservoir
Little White House
Bibliography
Senator from Missouri
Senate career
Truman Committee
Senate elections
1934
1940
33rd President of the United States
Presidency
timeline
Executive actions
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
international trips
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court candidates
First term
First inauguration
Atomic bombing
Marshall Plan
Strike wave
Mental Health Act
Potsdam Conference
NATO
Timeline
'45
'46
'47
'48
Second term
Second inauguration
Korean War
Housing Act
Fair Deal
Sherman Minton Supreme Court nomination
Steel strike
Puerto Rican referendum
Timeline
'49
'50
'51
'52 '53
Presidential and Vice presidential campaigns
1944
campaign
convention
election
1948
primaries
convention
campaign
election
Dewey Defeats Truman
1952
primaries
convention
Post-presidency
Presidential library
Death
National historic Site
vte
Harry S. Truman[b] (May 8, 1884  December 26, 1972) was the 33rd president of the United States, serving from 1945 to 1953. A leader of the Democratic Party, he previously served as the 34th vice president from January to April 1945 under Franklin Roosevelt and as a United States senator from Missouri from 1935 to January 1945. Assuming the presidency after Roosevelt's death, Truman implemented the Marshall Plan to rebuild the economy of Western Europe and established both the Truman Doctrine and NATO to contain the expansion of Soviet communism. He proposed numerous liberal domestic reforms, but few were enacted by the conservative coalition that dominated the Congress.
Truman grew up in Independence, Missouri, and during World War I fought in France as a captain in the Field Artillery. Returning home, he opened a haberdashery in Kansas City, Missouri, and was elected as a judge of Jackson County in 1922. Truman was elected to the United States Senate from Missouri in 1934. In 1940 1944 he gained national prominence as chairman of the Truman Committee, which was aimed at reducing waste and inefficiency in wartime contracts. 
Truman was elected vice-president in 1944 and assumed the presidency following the death of Roosevelt. Not until he became president was Truman informed about the ongoing Manhattan Project and the atomic bomb. Truman authorized the first and only use of nuclear weapons in war against Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan. Truman's administration engaged in an internationalist foreign policy by working closely with British Prime Minister Clement Attlee. Truman staunchly denounced isolationism. He energized the New Deal coalition during the 1948 presidential election and won a surprise victory against Republican Thomas E. Dewey that secured his own presidential term.
Truman presided over the onset of the Cold War in 1947. He oversaw the Berlin Airlift and Marshall Plan in 1948. With the involvement of the US in the Korean War of 1950 1953, South Korea repelled the invasion by North Korea. Domestically, the postwar economic challenges such as strikes and inflation created a mixed reaction over the effectiveness of his administration. In 1948, he proposed Congress pass comprehensive civil rights legislation. Congress refused, so in 1948 Truman issued Executive Order 9980 and Executive Order 9981 which desegregated the armed forces and federal agencies.
Corruption in the Truman administration became a central campaign issue in the 1952 presidential election. He was eligible for reelection in 1952, but with weak polls he decided not to run. Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower attacked Truman's record and won easily. Truman went into a retirement marked by the founding of his presidential library and the publication of his memoirs. It was long thought that his retirement years were financially difficult for Truman, resulting in Congress establishing a pension for former presidents, but evidence eventually emerged that he amassed considerable wealth, some of it while still president. When he left office, Truman's administration was heavily criticized, though critical reassessment of his presidency has improved his reputation among historians and the general population.[7]
Early life, family, and education
 Truman at age 13 in 1897
Truman was born in Lamar, Missouri, on May 8, 1884, the oldest child of John Anderson Truman and Martha Ellen Young Truman. He was named for his maternal uncle, Harrison "Harry" Young. His middle initial, "S", is not an abbreviation of one particular name. Rather, it honors both his grandfathers, Anderson Shipp Truman and Solomon Young, a semi-common practice in the American South.[8][b] A brother, John Vivian, was born soon after Harry, followed by sister Mary Jane.[9] Truman's ancestry is primarily English with some Scots-Irish, German, and French.[10][11]
John Truman was a farmer and livestock dealer. The family lived in Lamar until Harry was ten months old, when they moved to a farm near Harrisonville, Missouri. They next moved to Belton and in 1887 to his grandparents' 600-acre (240 ha) farm in Grandview.[12] When Truman was six, his parents moved to Independence, Missouri, so he could attend the Presbyterian Church Sunday School. He did not attend a conventional school until he was eight years old.[13] While living in Independence, he served as a Shabbos goy for Jewish neighbors, doing tasks for them on Shabbat that their religion prevented them from doing on that day.[14][15][16]
Truman was interested in music, reading, and history, all encouraged by his mother, with whom he was very close. As president, he solicited political as well as personal advice from her.[17] Truman learned to play the piano at age seven and took lessons from Mrs. E.C. White, a well-respected teacher in Kansas City.[18] He got up at five o'clock every morning to practice the piano, which he studied more than twice a week until he was fifteen, becoming quite a skilled player.[19] Truman worked as a page at the 1900 Democratic National Convention in Kansas City;[20] his father had many friends active in the Democratic Party who helped young Harry to gain his first political position.[21]
After graduating from Independence High School in 1901, Truman took classes at Spalding's Commercial College, a Kansas City business school. He studied bookkeeping, shorthand, and typing but stopped after a year.[22]
Working career
 Truman's home in Independence, Missouri
Truman was employed briefly in the mailroom of The Kansas City Star[23] before making use of his business college experience to obtain a job as a timekeeper for construction crews on the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway, which required him to sleep in workmen's camps along the rail lines.[24] Truman and his brother Vivian later worked as clerks at the National Bank of Commerce in Kansas City.[25]
In 1906, Truman returned to the Grandview farm, where he lived until entering the army in 1917.[26] During this period, he courted Bess Wallace. He proposed in 1911, but she turned him down. Truman later said he intended to propose again, but he wanted to have a better income than that earned by a farmer.[27] To that end, during his years on the farm and immediately after World War I, he became active in several business ventures. These included a lead and zinc mine near Commerce, Oklahoma, a company that bought land and leased the oil drilling rights to prospectors, and speculation in Kansas City real estate.[28] Truman occasionally derived some income from these enterprises, but none proved successful in the long term.[29]
Truman is the only president since William McKinley (elected in 1896) who did not earn a college degree.[30] In addition to having briefly attended business college, from 1923 to 1925 he took night courses toward an LL.B. at the Kansas City Law School (now the University of Missouri Kansas City School of Law) but dropped out after losing reelection as county judge.[31] He was informed by attorneys in the Kansas City area that his education and experience were probably sufficient to receive a license to practice law, but did not pursue it because he won election as presiding judge.[32]
While serving as president in 1947, Truman applied for a law license.[33] A friend who was an attorney began working out the arrangements, and informed Truman that his application had to be notarized. By the time Truman received this information he had changed his mind, so he never followed up. After the discovery of Truman's application in 1996 the Missouri Supreme Court issued him a posthumous honorary law license.[34]
Military service
National Guard
Due to the lack of funds for college, Truman considered attending the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, which had no tuition, but he was refused an appointment because of poor eyesight.[31] He enlisted in the Missouri National Guard in 1905 and served until 1911 in the Kansas City-based Battery B, 2nd Missouri Field Artillery Regiment, in which he attained the rank of corporal.[35] At his induction, his eyesight without glasses was unacceptable 20/50 in the right eye and 20/400 in the left (past the standard for legal blindness).[36] The second time he took the test, he passed by secretly memorizing the eye chart.[37] He was described as 5 feet 10 inches tall, gray eyed, dark haired and of light complexion.[38]
 Truman in September 1917.
World War I
When the United States entered World War I on April 6, 1917, Truman rejoined Battery B, successfully recruiting new soldiers for the expanding unit, for which he was elected as their first lieutenant.[39] Before deployment to France, Truman was sent for training to Camp Doniphan, Fort Sill, near Lawton, Oklahoma, when his regiment was federalized as the 129th Field Artillery.[40] The regimental commander during its training was Robert M. Danford, who later served as the Army's Chief of Field Artillery.[41] Truman recalled that he learned more practical, useful information from Danford in six weeks than from six months of formal Army instruction, and when Truman served as an artillery instructor, he consciously patterned his approach on Danford's.[41]
Truman also ran the camp canteen with Edward Jacobson, a clothing store clerk he knew from Kansas City. Unlike most canteens funded by unit members, which usually lost money, the canteen operated by Truman and Jacobson turned a profit, returning each soldier's initial $2 investment and $10,000 in dividends in six months.[35] At Fort Sill, Truman met Lieutenant James M. Pendergast, nephew of Tom Pendergast, a Kansas City political boss, a connection that had a profound influence on Truman's later life.[42][43]
 Truman in uniform, c. 1918
In mid-1918, about one million soldiers of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) were in France.[44] Truman was promoted to captain effective April 23,[45] and in July became commander of the newly arrived Battery D, 129th Field Artillery, 35th Division.[46][47] Battery D was known for its discipline problems, and Truman was initially unpopular because of his efforts to restore order.[35] Despite attempts by the men to intimidate him into quitting, Truman succeeded by making his corporals and sergeants accountable for discipline. He promised to back them up if they performed capably, and reduce them to private if they did not.[48] In an event memorialized in battery lore as "The Battle of Who Run", his soldiers began to flee during a sudden night attack by the Germans in the Vosges Mountains; Truman succeeded at ordering his men to stay and fight, using profanity from his railroad days. The men were so surprised to hear Truman use such language that they immediately obeyed.[35]
Truman's unit joined in a massive prearranged assault barrage on September 26, 1918, at the opening of the Meuse Argonne offensive.[49] They advanced with difficulty over pitted terrain to follow the infantry, and set up an observation post west of Cheppy.[49] On September 27, Truman saw through his binoculars an enemy artillery battery deploying across a river in a position which would allow them to fire upon the neighboring 28th Division.[49] Truman's orders limited him to targets facing the 35th Division, but he ignored this and patiently waited until the Germans had walked their horses well away from their guns, ensuring they could not relocate out of range of Truman's battery.[49] He then ordered his men to open fire, and their attack destroyed the enemy battery.[49] His actions were credited with saving the lives of 28th Division soldiers who otherwise would have come under fire from the Germans.[50][51] Truman was given a dressing down by his regimental commander, Colonel Karl D. Klemm, who threatened to convene a court-martial, but Klemm never followed through, and Truman was not punished.[49]
In other action during the Meuse Argonne offensive, Truman's battery provided support for George S. Patton's tank brigade,[52] and fired some of the last shots of the war on November 11, 1918. Battery D did not lose any men while under Truman's command in France. To show their appreciation of his leadership, his men presented him with a large loving cup upon their return to the United States after the war.[35]
The war was a transformative experience in which Truman manifested his leadership qualities. He had entered the service in 1917 as a family farmer who had worked in clerical jobs that did not require the ability to motivate and direct others, but during the war, he gained leadership experience and a record of success that greatly enhanced and supported his post-war political career in Missouri.[35]
Truman was brought up in the Presbyterian and Baptist churches,[53] but avoided revivals and sometimes ridiculed revivalist preachers.[54] He rarely spoke about religion, which to him, primarily meant ethical behavior along traditional Protestant lines.[55] Truman once wrote in a letter to his future wife, Bess: "You know that I know nothing about Lent and such things..."[56] Most of the soldiers he commanded in the war were Catholics, and one of his close friends was the 129th Field Artillery's chaplain, Monsignor L. Curtis Tiernan.[57] The two remained friends until Tiernan's death in 1960.[58] Developing leadership and interpersonal skills that later made him a successful politician helped Truman get along with his Catholic soldiers, as he did with soldiers of other Christian denominations and the unit's Jewish members.[59][60]
Officers' Reserve Corps
 Officers of the 129th Field Artillery, at regimental headquarters at Chateau le Chanay near Courcemont, France, March 1919. Captain Harry S. Truman is pictured in the second row, third from the right.
Truman was honorably discharged from the Army as a captain on May 6, 1919.[61] In 1920, he was appointed a major in the Officers Reserve Corps.[62] He became a lieutenant colonel in 1925 and a colonel in 1932.[63] In the 1920s and 1930s he commanded 1st Battalion, 379th Field Artillery, 102d Infantry Division.[64] After promotion to colonel, Truman advanced to command of the same regiment.[65]
After his election to the U.S. Senate, Truman was transferred to the General Assignments Group, a holding unit for less active officers, although he had not been consulted in advance.[66] Truman protested his reassignment, which led to his resumption of regimental command.[66] He remained an active reservist until the early 1940s.[67] Truman volunteered for active military service during World War II, but was not accepted, partly because of age, and partly because President Franklin D. Roosevelt desired senators and congressmen who belonged to the military reserves to support the war effort by remaining in Congress, or by ending their active duty service and resuming their congressional seats.[68] He was an inactive reservist from the early 1940s until retiring as a colonel in the then redesignated U.S. Army Reserve on January 20, 1953.[69]
Military awards and decorations
Truman was awarded a World War I Victory Medal with two battle clasps (for St. Mihiel and Meuse-Argonne) and a Defensive Sector Clasp. He was also the recipient of two Armed Forces Reserve Medals.[70]
Politics
Jackson County judge
 Harry and Bess Truman on their wedding day, June 28, 1919
After his wartime service, Truman returned to Independence, where he married Bess Wallace on June 28, 1919.[71] The couple had one child, Mary Margaret Truman.[72]
Shortly before the wedding, Truman and Jacobson opened a haberdashery together at 104 West 12th Street in downtown Kansas City. After brief initial success, the store went bankrupt during the recession of 1921.[17] Truman did not pay off the last of the debts from that venture until 1935, when he did so with the aid of banker William T. Kemper, who worked behind the scenes to enable Truman's brother Vivian to buy Truman's $5,600 promissory note during the asset sale of a bank that had failed in the Great Depression.[73][74] The note had risen and fallen in value as it was bought and sold, interest accumulated and Truman made payments, so by the time the last bank to hold it failed, it was worth nearly $9,000.[75] Thanks to Kemper's efforts, Vivian Truman was able to buy it for $1,000.[74] Jacobson and Truman remained close friends even after their store failed, and Jacobson's advice to Truman on Zionism later played a role in the U.S. Government's decision to recognize Israel.[76]
With the help of the Kansas City Democratic machine led by Tom Pendergast, Truman was elected in 1922 as County Court judge of Jackson County's eastern district Jackson County's three-judge court included judges from the western district (Kansas City), the eastern district (the county outside Kansas City), and a presiding judge elected countywide. This was an administrative rather than a judicial court, similar to county commissions in many other jurisdictions. Truman lost his 1924 reelection campaign in a Republican wave led by President Calvin Coolidge's landslide election to a full term. Two years selling automobile club memberships convinced him that a public service career was safer for a family man approaching middle age, and he planned a run for presiding judge in 1926.[77]
Truman won the job in 1926 with the support of the Pendergast machine, and he was re-elected in 1930. As presiding judge, Truman helped coordinate the Ten Year Plan, which transformed Jackson County and the Kansas City skyline with new public works projects, including an extensive series of roads and construction of a new Wight and Wight-designed County Court building. Also in 1926, he became president of the National Old Trails Road Association, and during his term he oversaw dedication of 12 Madonna of the Trail monuments to honor pioneer women.[77][78]
In 1933, Truman was named Missouri's director for the Federal Re-Employment program (part of the Civil Works Administration) at the request of Postmaster General James Farley. This was payback to Pendergast for delivering the Kansas City vote to Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election. The appointment confirmed Pendergast's control over federal patronage jobs in Missouri and marked the zenith of his power. It also created a relationship between Truman and Roosevelt's aide Harry Hopkins and assured Truman's avid support for the New Deal.[79]
U.S. Senator from Missouri
 Drawer from the Senate desk used by Truman
After serving as a county judge, Truman wanted to run for governor or Congress,[80][81] but Pendergast rejected these ideas. Truman then thought he might serve out his career in some well-paying county sinecure;[81] circumstances changed when Pendergast reluctantly backed him as the machine's choice in the 1934 Democratic primary election for the U.S. Senate from Missouri, after Pendergast's first four choices had declined to run.[82] In the primary, Truman defeated Congressmen John J. Cochran and Jacob L. Milligan with the solid support of Jackson County, which was crucial to his candidacy. Also critical were the contacts he had made statewide in his capacity as a county official, member of the Freemasons,[c] military reservist,[d] and member of the American Legion.[e][86] In the general election, Truman defeated incumbent Republican Roscoe C. Patterson by nearly 20 percentage points in a continuing wave of pro-New Deal Democrats elected during  the Great Depression.[82][87][88]
Truman assumed office with a reputation as "the Senator from Pendergast". He referred patronage decisions to Pendergast but maintained that he voted with his own conscience. He later defended the patronage decisions by saying that "by offering a little to the machine, [he] saved a lot".[88][89] In his first term, Truman spoke out against corporate greed and the dangers of Wall Street speculators and other moneyed special interests attaining too much influence in national affairs.[90] Though he served on the high-profile Appropriations and Interstate Commerce Committees, he was largely ignored by President Roosevelt and had trouble getting calls returned from the White House.[88][91]
During the U.S. Senate election in 1940, U.S. Attorney Maurice Milligan (former opponent Jacob Milligan's brother) and former governor Lloyd Stark both challenged Truman in the Democratic primary. Truman was politically weakened by Pendergast's imprisonment for income tax evasion the previous year; the senator had remained loyal, having claimed that Republican judges (not the Roosevelt administration) were responsible for the boss's downfall.[92] St. Louis party leader Robert E. Hannegan's support of Truman proved crucial; he later brokered the deal that put Truman on the national ticket. In the end, Stark and Milligan split the anti-Pendergast vote in the Senate Democratic primary and Truman won by a total of 8,000 votes. In the November election, Truman defeated Republican Manvel H. Davis by 51 49 percent.[93] As senator, Truman opposed both Nazi Germany and Communist Russia. Two days after Hitler invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, he said:
If we see that Germany is winning we ought to help Russia, and if Russia is winning we ought to help Germany, and that way let them kill as many as possible although I don't want to see Hitler victorious under any circumstances.[94]
This quote without its last part later became a staple in Soviet and later Russian propaganda as "evidence" of an American conspiracy to destroy the country.[95][96]
Truman Committee
Further information: Truman Committee
In late 1940, Truman traveled to various military bases. The waste and profiteering he saw led him to use his chairmanship of the Committee on Military Affairs Subcommittee on War Mobilization to start investigations into abuses while the nation prepared for war. A new special committee was set up under Truman to conduct a formal investigation; the White House supported this plan rather than weather a more hostile probe by the House of Representatives. The main mission of the committee was to expose and fight waste and corruption in the gigantic government wartime contracts.
Truman's initiative convinced Senate leaders of the necessity for the committee, which reflected his demands for honest and efficient administration and his distrust of big business and Wall Street. Truman managed the committee "with extraordinary skill" and usually achieved consensus, generating heavy media publicity that gave him a national reputation.[97][98] Activities of the Truman Committee ranged from criticizing the "dollar-a-year men" hired by the government, many of whom proved ineffective, to investigating a shoddily built New Jersey housing project for war workers.[99][100] In March 1944, Truman attempted to probe the expensive Manhattan Project but was persuaded by Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson to discontinue with the investigation.[101]: 634 
The committee reportedly saved as much as $15 billion (equivalent to $230 billion in 2021),[102][103][104][105] and its activities put Truman on the cover of Time magazine.[106] According to the Senate's historical minutes, in leading the committee, "Truman erased his earlier public image as an errand-runner for Kansas City politicos", and "no senator ever gained greater political benefits from chairing a special investigating committee than did Missouri's Harry S. Truman."[107]
Vice presidency (1945)
See also: 1944 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection
Truman visits his mother in Grandview, Missouri, after being nominated the Democratic candidate for vice president, July 1944.Roosevelt Truman poster from 1944
Roosevelt's advisors knew that Roosevelt might not live out a fourth term and that his vice president would very likely become the next president. Henry Wallace had served as Roosevelt's vice president for four years and was popular on the left, but he was viewed as too far to the left and too friendly to labor for some of Roosevelt's advisers. The President and several of his confidantes wanted to replace Wallace with someone more acceptable to Democratic Party leaders. Outgoing Democratic National Committee chairman Frank C. Walker, incoming chairman Hannegan, party treasurer Edwin W. Pauley, Bronx party boss Ed Flynn, Chicago Mayor Edward Joseph Kelly, and lobbyist George E. Allen all wanted to keep Wallace off the ticket.[108] Roosevelt told party leaders that he would accept either Truman or Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas.
State and city party leaders strongly preferred Truman, and Roosevelt agreed.[109] Truman had repeatedly said that he was not in the race and that he did not want the vice presidency, and he remained reluctant.[109] One reason was that his wife and sister Mary Jane were both on his Senate staff payroll, and he feared negative publicity.[109] Truman did not campaign for the vice-presidential spot, though he welcomed the attention as evidence that he had become more than the "Senator from Pendergast".[110] Truman's nomination was dubbed the "Second Missouri Compromise" and was well received. The Roosevelt Truman ticket achieved a 432 99 electoral-vote victory in the election, defeating the Republican ticket of Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York and running mate Governor John Bricker of Ohio. Truman was sworn in as vice president on January 20, 1945.[111] After the inauguration, Truman called his mother, who instructed him, "Now you behave yourself."[112]
Truman's brief vice-presidency was relatively uneventful. Truman mostly presided over the Senate and attended parties and receptions. He kept the same offices from his Senate years, mostly only using the Vice President's official office in the Capital to greet visitors. Truman was the first vice president to have a Secret Service agent assigned to him. Truman envisioned the office as a liaison between the Senate and the president.[113] On April 10, 1945,[114] Truman cast his only tie-breaking vote as president of the Senate, against a Robert A. Taft amendment that would have blocked the postwar delivery of Lend-Lease Act items contracted for during the war.[115][116] Roosevelt rarely contacted him, even to inform him of major decisions; the president and vice president met alone together only twice during their time in office.[117]
In one of his first acts as vice president, Truman created some controversy when he attended the disgraced Pendergast's funeral. He brushed aside the criticism, saying simply, "He was always my friend and I have always been his."[17] He had rarely discussed world affairs or domestic politics with Roosevelt; he was uninformed about major initiatives relating to the war and the top-secret Manhattan Project, which was about to test the world's first atomic bomb.[118] In an event that generated negative publicity for Truman, he was photographed with actress Lauren Bacall sitting atop the piano at the National Press Club as he played for soldiers.[119]
Truman had been vice president for 82 days when President Roosevelt died on April 12, 1945.[118] Truman, presiding over the Senate, as usual, had just adjourned the session for the day and was preparing to have a drink in House Speaker Sam Rayburn's office when he received an urgent message to go immediately to the White House, where Eleanor Roosevelt told him that her husband had died after a massive cerebral hemorrhage. Truman asked her if there was anything he could do for her; she replied, "Is there anything we can do for you? For you are the one in trouble now!"[120][121][122] He was sworn in as president at 7:09 pm in the West Wing of the White House, by Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone.[123]
Presidency (1945 1953)
Main article: Presidency of Harry S. Truman
Further information: Foreign policy of the Harry S. Truman administration
At the White House Truman replaced Roosevelt holdovers with old confidants. The White House was badly understaffed with no more than a dozen aides; they could barely keep up with the heavy work flow of a greatly expanded executive department. Truman acted as his own chief of staff on a daily basis, as well as his own liaison with Congress a body he already knew very well. He was not well prepared to deal with the press, and never achieved the jovial familiarity of FDR. Filled with latent anger about all the setbacks in his career, he bitterly mistrusted the journalists. He saw them as enemies lying in wait for his next careless miscue. Truman was a very hard worker, often to the point of exhaustion, which left him testy, easily annoyed, and on the verge of appearing unpresidential or petty. In terms of major issues, he discussed them in depth with top advisors. He mastered the details of the federal budget as well as anyone. Truman was a poor speaker reading a text. However, his visible anger made him an effective stump speaker, denouncing his enemies as his supporters hollered back at him "Give Em Hell, Harry!"[124]
Truman surrounded himself with his old friends, and appointed several to high positions that seemed well beyond their competence, including his two secretaries of the treasury, Fred Vinson and John Snyder. His closest friend in the White House was his military aide Harry H. Vaughan, who knew little of military or foreign affairs and was criticized for trading access to the White House for expensive gifts.[125][126] Truman loved to spend as much time as possible playing poker, telling stories and sipping bourbon. Alonzo Hamby notes that:
... to many in the general public, gambling and bourbon swilling, however low-key, were not quite presidential. Neither was the intemperant "give 'em hell" campaign style nor the occasional profane phrase uttered in public. Poker exemplified a larger problem: the tension between his attempts at an image of leadership necessarily a cut above the ordinary and an informality that at times appeared to verge on crudeness.[127][128]
First term (1945 1949)
Assuming office
Further information: Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
 Joseph Stalin, Harry S. Truman, and Winston Churchill in Potsdam, July 1945
On his first full day, Truman told reporters: "Boys, if you ever pray, pray for me now. I don't know if you fellas ever had a load of hay fall on you, but when they told me what happened yesterday, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me."[129]
Truman asked all the members of Roosevelt's cabinet to remain in place, but he soon replaced almost all of them, especially with old friends from his Senate days.[130]
Dropping atomic bombs on Japan
Truman benefited from a honeymoon period from the success in defeating Nazi Germany in Europe and the nation celebrated V-E Day on May 8, 1945, his 61st birthday.[131]
Although Truman was told briefly on the afternoon of April 12 that he had a new, highly destructive weapon, it was not until April 25 that Secretary of War Henry Stimson told him the details. [132]
We have discovered the most terrible bomb in the history of the world. It may be the fire destruction prophesied in the Euphrates Valley Era, after Noah and his fabulous Ark. Harry Truman, writing about the atomic bomb in his diary[133] on July 25, 1945[134]
Truman journeyed to Berlin for the Potsdam Conference with Joseph Stalin and the British leader Winston Churchill. He was there when he learned the Trinity test the first atomic bomb on July 16 had been successful. He hinted to Stalin that he was about to use a new kind of weapon against the Japanese. Though this was the first time the Soviets had been officially given information about the atomic bomb, Stalin was already aware of the bomb project having learned about it through atomic espionage long before Truman did.[135][136][137]
In August, the Japanese government refused surrender demands as specifically outlined in the Potsdam Declaration. With the invasion of Japan imminent, Truman approved the schedule for dropping the two available bombs. Truman always said attacking Japan with atomic bombs saved many lives on both sides; military estimates for the invasion of Japan were that it could take a year and result in 250,000 to 500,000 Allied casualties. Hiroshima was bombed on August 6, and Nagasaki three days later, leaving 105,000 dead.[138] The Soviet Union declared war on Japan on August 9 and invaded Manchuria. Japan agreed to surrender the following day.[139][140]
 Truman announces Japan's surrender, August 14, 1945.
Supporters[f] of Truman's decision argue that, given the tenacious Japanese defense of the outlying islands, the bombings saved hundreds of thousands of lives of Allied prisoners, Japanese civilians, and combatants on both sides that would have been lost in an invasion of Japan. Critics have argued that the use of nuclear weapons was unnecessary, given that conventional attacks or a demonstrative bombing of an uninhabited area might have forced Japan's surrender and therefore assert that the attack constituted a crime of war.[141][142][143] In 1948 Truman defended his decision to use atomic bombs:
As President of the United States, I had the fateful responsibility of deciding whether or not to use this weapon for the first time. It was the hardest decision I ever had to make. But the President cannot duck hard problems he cannot pass the buck. I made the decision after discussions with the ablest men in our Government, and after long and prayerful consideration. I decided that the bomb should be used to end the war quickly and save countless lives Japanese as well as American.[144]
Truman continued to strongly defend himself in his memoirs in 1955 1956, stating many lives could have been lost had the United States invaded mainland Japan without the atomic bombs. In 1963, he stood by his decision, telling a journalist "it was done to save 125,000 youngsters on the U.S. side and 125,000 on the Japanese side from getting killed and that is what it did. It probably also saved a half million youngsters on both sides from being maimed for life."[145]
Labor unions, strikes and economic issues
See also: Strike wave of 1946
The end of World War II was followed by an uneasy transition from war to a peacetime economy. The costs of the war effort had been enormous, and Truman was intent on diminishing military services as quickly as possible to curtail the government's military expenditures. The effect of demobilization on the economy was unknown, proposals were met with skepticism and resistance, and fears existed that the nation would slide back into depression. In Roosevelt's final years, Congress began to reassert legislative power and Truman faced a congressional body where Republicans and conservative southern Democrats formed a powerful "conservative coalition" voting bloc. The New Deal had greatly strengthened labor unions and they formed a major base of support for Truman's Democratic Party. The Republicans, working with big business, made it their highest priority to weaken those unions.[146] The unions had been promoted by the government during the war and tried to make their gains permanent through large-scale strikes in major industries. Meanwhile, price controls were slowly ending and inflation was soaring.[147] Truman's response to the widespread dissatisfaction was generally seen as ineffective.[147]
 Truman with Greek-American sponge divers in Florida, 1947
When a national rail strike threatened in May 1946, Truman seized the railroads in an attempt to contain the issue, but two key railway unions struck anyway. The entire national railroad system was shut down, immobilizing 24,000 freight trains and 175,000 passenger trains a day.[148] For two days, public anger mounted. His staff prepared a speech that Truman read to Congress calling for a new law, whereby railroad strikers would be drafted into the army. As he concluded his address, he was handed a note that the strike had been settled on presidential terms; nevertheless, a few hours later, the House voted to draft the strikers. The bill died in the Senate.[149][150]
Approval rating falls; Republicans win Congress in 1946
The president's approval rating dropped from 82 percent in the polls in January 1946 to 52 percent by June.[151] This dissatisfaction led to large Democratic losses in the 1946 midterm elections, and Republicans took control of Congress for the first time since 1930. When Truman dropped to 32 percent in the polls, Democratic Arkansas Senator William Fulbright suggested that Truman resign; the president said he did not care what Senator "Halfbright" said.[152][153]
Truman cooperated closely with the Republican leaders on foreign policy but fought them bitterly on domestic issues. The power of the labor unions was significantly curtailed by the Taft Hartley Act which was enacted over Truman's veto. Truman twice vetoed bills to lower income tax rates in 1947. Although the initial vetoes were sustained, Congress overrode his veto of a tax cut bill in 1948. In one notable instance of bipartisanship, Congress passed the Presidential Succession Act of 1947, which replaced the secretary of state with the Speaker of the House and the president pro tempore of the Senate as successor to the president after the vice president.[154]
Proposes "Fair Deal" liberalism
As he readied for the 1948 election, Truman made clear his identity as a Democrat in the New Deal tradition, advocating for national health insurance,[155] and repeal of the Taft Hartley Act. He broke with the New Deal by initiating an aggressive civil rights program which he termed a moral priority. His economic and social vision constituted a broad legislative agenda that came to be called the "Fair Deal."[156] Truman's proposals were not well received by Congress, even with renewed Democratic majorities in Congress after 1948. The Solid South rejected civil rights as those states still enforced segregation. Only one of the major Fair Deal bills, the Housing Act of 1949, was ever enacted.[157][158] Many of the New Deal programs that persisted during Truman's presidency have since received minor improvements and extensions.[159]
Marshall Plan, Cold War, and China
 Truman's press secretary was his old friend Charles Griffith Ross. He had great integrity but, says Alonzo L. Hamby, as a senior White House aide he was, "A better newsman than news handler, he never established a policy of coordinating news releases throughout the executive branch, frequently bumbled details, never developed ... a strategy for marketing the president's image and failed to establish a strong press office."[160]
As a Wilsonian internationalist, Truman supported Roosevelt's policy in favor of the creation of the United Nations and included Eleanor Roosevelt on the delegation to the first UN General Assembly.[161] With the Soviet Union expanding its sphere of influence through Eastern Europe, Truman and his foreign policy advisors took a hard line against the USSR. In this, he matched U.S. public opinion which quickly came to believe the Soviets were intent upon world domination.[162]
Although he had little personal expertise on foreign matters, Truman listened closely to his top advisors, especially George Marshall and Dean Acheson. The Republicans controlled Congress in 1947 1948, so he worked with their leaders, especially Senator Arthur H. Vandenburg, chairman of the powerful Foreign Relations Committee.[163] He won bipartisan support for both the Truman Doctrine, which formalized a policy of Soviet containment, and the Marshall Plan, which aimed to help rebuild postwar Europe.[164][165]
To get Congress to spend the vast sums necessary to restart the moribund European economy, Truman used an ideological argument, arguing that communism flourishes in economically deprived areas.[166] As part of the U.S. Cold War strategy, Truman signed the National Security Act of 1947 and reorganized military forces by merging the Department of War and the Department of the Navy into the National Military Establishment (later the Department of Defense) and creating the U.S. Air Force. The act also created the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the National Security Council.[167] In 1952, Truman secretly consolidated and empowered the cryptologic elements of the United States by creating the National Security Agency (NSA).
Truman did not know what to do about China, where the Nationalists and Communists were fighting a large-scale civil war. The Nationalists had been major wartime allies and had large-scale popular support in the United States, along with a powerful lobby. General George Marshall spent most of 1946 in China trying to negotiate a compromise, but failed. He convinced Truman the Nationalists would never win on their own and a very large-scale U.S. intervention to stop the Communists would significantly weaken U.S. opposition to the Soviets in Europe. By 1949, the Communists under Mao Zedong had won the civil war, the United States had a new enemy in Asia, and Truman came under fire from conservatives for "losing" China.[168]
Berlin airlift
Further information: Berlin Blockade
On June 24, 1948, the Soviet Union blocked access to the three Western-held sectors of Berlin. The Allies had not negotiated a deal to guarantee supply of the sectors deep within the Soviet-occupied zone. The commander of the U.S. occupation zone in Germany, General Lucius D. Clay, proposed sending a large armored column across the Soviet zone to West Berlin with instructions to defend itself if it were stopped or attacked. Truman believed this would entail an unacceptable risk of war. He approved Ernest Bevin's plan to supply the blockaded city by air.
On June 25, the Allies initiated the Berlin Airlift, a campaign to deliver food, coal and other supplies using military aircraft on a massive scale. Nothing like it had ever been attempted before, and no single nation had the capability, either logistically or materially, to accomplish it. The airlift worked; ground access was again granted on May 11, 1949. Nevertheless, the airlift continued for several months after that. The Berlin Airlift was one of Truman's great foreign policy successes; it significantly aided his election campaign in 1948.[169]
Recognition of Israel
 Truman in the Oval Office, receiving a Hanukkah Menorah from the prime minister of Israel, David Ben-Gurion (center). To the right is Abba Eban, ambassador of Israel to the United States.
Truman had long taken an interest in the history of the Middle East and was sympathetic to Jews who sought to re-establish their ancient homeland in Mandatory Palestine. As a senator, he announced support for Zionism; in 1943 he called for a homeland for those Jews who survived the Nazi regime. However, State Department officials were reluctant to offend the Arabs, who were opposed to the establishment of a Jewish state in the large region long populated and dominated culturally by Arabs. Secretary of Defense James Forrestal warned Truman of the importance of Saudi Arabian oil in another war; Truman replied he would decide his policy on the basis of justice, not oil.[170] U.S. diplomats with experience in the region were opposed, but Truman told them he had few Arabs among his constituents.[171]
Palestine was secondary to the goal of protecting the "Northern Tier" of Greece, Turkey, and Iran from communism, as promised by the Truman Doctrine.[172] Weary of both the convoluted politics of the Middle East and pressure by Jewish leaders, Truman was undecided on his policy and skeptical about how the Jewish "underdogs" would handle power.[173][174] He later cited as decisive in his recognition of the Jewish state the advice of his former business partner, Eddie Jacobson, a non-religious Jew whom Truman absolutely trusted.[171]
Truman decided to recognize Israel over the objections of Secretary of State George Marshall, who feared it would hurt relations with the populous Arab states. Marshall believed the paramount threat to the United States was the Soviet Union and feared Arab oil would be lost to the United States in the event of war; he warned Truman the United States was "playing with fire with nothing to put it out".[175] Truman recognized the State of Israel on May 14, 1948, eleven minutes after it declared itself a nation.[176][177] Of his decision to recognize the Israeli state, Truman said in an interview years later: "Hitler had been murdering Jews right and left. I saw it, and I dream about it even to this day. The Jews needed some place where they could go. It is my attitude that the American government couldn't stand idly by while the victims [of] Hitler's madness are not allowed to build new lives."[178]
Calls for Civil Rights
Under his predecessor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Fair Employment Practices Committee was created to address racial discrimination in employment,[179] and in 1946, Truman created the President's Committee on Civil Rights. On June 29, 1947, Truman became the first president to address the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The speech took place at the Lincoln Memorial during the NAACP convention and was carried nationally on radio. In that speech, Truman laid out the need to end discrimination, which would be advanced by the first comprehensive, presidentially proposed civil rights legislation. Truman on "civil rights and human freedom", declared:[180]
It is my deep conviction that we have reached a turning point in the long history of our country's efforts to guarantee freedom and equality to all our citizens   it is more important today than ever before to ensure that all Americans enjoy these rights.   [And] When I say all Americans, I mean all Americans   Our immediate task is to remove the last remnants of the barriers which stand between millions of our citizens and their birthright. There is no justifiable reason for discrimination because of ancestry, or religion, or race, or color. We must not tolerate such limitations on the freedom of any of our people and on their enjoyment of basic rights which every citizen in a truly democratic society must possess. Every man should have the right to a decent home, the right to an education, the right to adequate medical care, the right to a worthwhile job, the right to an equal share in making the public decisions through the ballot, and the right to a fair trial in a fair court. We must ensure that these rights   on equal terms   are enjoyed by every citizen. To these principles I pledge my full and continued support. Many of our people still suffer the indignity of insult, the harrowing fear of intimidation, and, I regret to say, the threat of physical injury and mob violence. Prejudice and intolerance in which these evils are rooted still exist. The conscience of our nation, and the legal machinery which enforces it, have not yet secured to each citizen full freedom from fear.
In February 1948, Truman delivered a formal message to Congress requesting adoption of his 10-point program to secure civil rights, including anti-lynching, voter rights, and elimination of segregation. "No political act since the Compromise of 1877," argued biographer Taylor Branch, "so profoundly influenced race relations; in a sense it was a repeal of 1877."[181]
1948 election
Main article: Harry S. Truman 1948 presidential campaign
Further information: 1948 United States presidential election
 President Truman (left) with Governor Dewey (right) at dedication of the Idlewild Airport, meeting for the first time since nominated by their respective parties for the Presidency
The 1948 presidential election is remembered for Truman's stunning come-from-behind victory.[182] In the spring of 1948, Truman's public approval rating stood at 36 percent,[183] and the president was nearly universally regarded as incapable of winning the general election. At the 1948 Democratic National Convention, Truman attempted to unify the party with a vague civil rights plank in the party platform. His intention was to assuage the internal conflicts between the northern and southern wings of his party. Events overtook his efforts. A sharp address given by Mayor Hubert Humphrey of Minneapolis as well as the local political interests of a number of urban bosses convinced the convention to adopt a stronger civil rights plank, which Truman approved wholeheartedly.[184] Truman delivered an aggressive acceptance speech attacking the 80th Congress, which Truman called the "Do Nothing Congress,"[147] and promising to win the election and "make these Republicans like it."[185]
Republicans approve of the American farmer, but they are willing to help him go broke. They stand four-square for the American home but not for housing. They are strong for labor but they are stronger for restricting labor's rights. They favor minimum wage the smaller the minimum wage the better. They endorse educational opportunity for all but they won't spend money for teachers or for schools. They think modern medical care and hospitals are fine for people who can afford them ... They think American standard of living is a fine thing so long as it doesn't spread to all the people. And they admire the Government of the United States so much that they would like to buy it. Harry S. Truman, October 13, 1948, St. Paul, Minnesota, Radio Broadcast[186][187][188][189]
Within two weeks of the 1948 convention Truman issued Executive Order 9981, ending racial discrimination in the Armed Services, and Executive Order 9980 to end discrimination in federal agencies.[190][191] Truman took a considerable political risk in backing civil rights, and many seasoned Democrats were concerned the loss of Dixiecrat support might seriously weaken the party. South Carolina Governor Strom Thurmond, a segregationist, declared his candidacy for the presidency on a Dixiecrat ticket and led a full-scale revolt of Southern "states' rights" proponents. This rebellion on the right was matched by one on the left, led by Wallace on the Progressive Party ticket. The Democratic Party was splitting three ways and victory in November seemed unlikely.[192] For his running mate, Truman accepted Kentucky Senator Alben W. Barkley, though he really wanted Justice William O. Douglas, who turned down the nomination.[193]
Truman's political advisors described the political scene as "one unholy, confusing cacophony." They told Truman to speak directly to the people, in a personal way.[194] Campaign manager William J. Bray said Truman took this advice, and spoke personally and passionately, sometimes even setting aside his notes to talk to Americans "of everything that is in my heart and soul."[195]
The campaign was a 21,928-mile (35,290 km) presidential odyssey.[196] In a personal appeal to the nation, Truman crisscrossed the United States by train; his "whistle stop" speeches from the rear platform of the observation car, Ferdinand Magellan, came to represent his campaign. His combative appearances captured the popular imagination and drew huge crowds. Six stops in Michigan drew a combined half-million people;[197] a full million turned out for a New York City ticker-tape parade.[198]
 1948 electoral vote results
 Truman was so widely expected to lose the 1948 election that the Chicago Tribune had printed papers with this erroneous headline when few returns were in.
The large, mostly spontaneous gatherings at Truman's whistle-stop events were an important sign of a change in momentum in the campaign, but this shift went virtually unnoticed by the national press corps. It continued reporting Republican Thomas Dewey's apparent impending victory as a certainty. The three major polling organizations stopped polling well before the November 2 election date Roper in September, and Crossley and Gallup in October thus failing to measure the period when Truman appears to have surged past Dewey.[199][200]
In the end, Truman held his progressive Midwestern base, won most of the Southern states despite the civil rights plank, and squeaked through with narrow victories in a few critical states, notably Ohio, California, and Illinois. The final tally showed the president had secured 303 electoral votes, Dewey 189, and Thurmond only 39. Henry Wallace got none. The defining image of the campaign came after Election Day, when an ecstatic Truman held aloft the erroneous front page of the Chicago Tribune with a huge headline proclaiming "Dewey Defeats Truman."[201]
Full elected term (1949 1953)
Truman's second inauguration was the first ever televised nationally.[202]
Hydrogen bomb decision
The Soviet Union's atomic bomb project progressed much faster than had been expected,[203] and they detonated their first bomb on August 29, 1949. Over the next several months there was an intense debate that split the U.S. government, military, and scientific communities regarding whether to proceed with the development of the far more powerful hydrogen bomb.[204] The debate touched on matters from technical feasibility to strategic value to the morality of creating a massively destructive weapon.[205][206] On January 31, 1950, Truman made the decision to go forward on the grounds that if the Soviets could make an H-bomb, the United States must do so as well and stay ahead in the nuclear arms race.[207][208] The development achieved fruition with the first U.S. H-bomb test on October 31, 1952, which was officially announced by Truman on January 7, 1953.[209]
Korean War
Further information: Korean War
 President Truman signing a proclamation declaring a national emergency and authorizing U.S. entry into the Korean War
On June 25, 1950, the North Korean army under Kim Il-sung invaded South Korea, starting the Korean War. In the early weeks of the war, the North Koreans easily pushed back their southern counterparts.[210] Truman called for a naval blockade of Korea, only to learn that due to budget cutbacks, the U.S. Navy could not enforce such a measure.[211]
Truman promptly urged the United Nations to intervene; it did, authorizing troops under the UN flag led by U.S. General Douglas MacArthur. Truman decided he did not need formal authorization from Congress, believing that most legislators supported his position; this would come back to haunt him later when the stalemated conflict was dubbed "Mr. Truman's War" by legislators.[210]
However, on July 3, 1950, Truman did give Senate Majority Leader Scott W. Lucas a draft resolution titled "Joint Resolution Expressing Approval of the Action Taken in Korea". Lucas stated Congress supported the use of force, the formal resolution would pass but was unnecessary, and the consensus in Congress was to acquiesce. Truman responded he did not want "to appear to be trying to get around Congress and use extra-Constitutional powers," and added that it was "up to Congress whether such a resolution should be introduced."[212]
By August 1950, U.S. troops pouring into South Korea under UN auspices were able to stabilize the situation.[213] Responding to criticism over readiness, Truman fired his secretary of defense, Louis A. Johnson, replacing him with the retired General Marshall. With UN approval, Truman decided on a "rollback" policy liberation of North Korea.[214] UN forces led by General Douglas MacArthur led the counterattack, scoring a stunning surprise victory with an amphibious landing at the Battle of Inchon that nearly trapped the invaders. UN forces marched north, toward the Yalu River boundary with China, with the goal of reuniting Korea under UN auspices.[215]
China surprised the UN forces with a large-scale invasion in November. The UN forces were forced back to below the 38th parallel, then recovered.[216] By early 1951 the war became a fierce stalemate at about the 38th parallel where it had begun. Truman rejected MacArthur's request to attack Chinese supply bases north of the Yalu, but MacArthur promoted his plan to Republican House leader Joseph Martin, who leaked it to the press. Truman was gravely concerned further escalation of the war might lead to open conflict with the Soviet Union, which was already supplying weapons and providing warplanes (with Korean markings and Soviet aircrew). Therefore, on April 11, 1951, Truman fired MacArthur from his commands.[217]
I fired him [MacArthur] because he wouldn't respect the authority of the President ... I didn't fire him because he was a dumb son of a bitch, although he was, but that's not against the law for generals. If it was, half to three-quarters of them would be in jail.[218]
 Truman to biographer Merle Miller, 1972, posthumously quoted in Time magazine, 1973
The dismissal of General Douglas MacArthur was among the least politically popular decisions in presidential history. Truman's approval ratings plummeted, and he faced calls for his impeachment from, among others, Senator Robert A. Taft.[219] Fierce criticism from virtually all quarters accused Truman of refusing to shoulder the blame for a war gone sour and blaming his generals instead. Others, including Eleanor Roosevelt and all of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, publicly supported Truman's decision. MacArthur meanwhile returned to the United States to a hero's welcome, and addressed a joint session of Congress, a speech the president called "a bunch of damn bullshit."[220]
Truman and his generals considered the use of nuclear weapons against the Chinese army, but ultimately chose not to escalate the war to a nuclear level.[221] The war remained a frustrating stalemate for two years, with over 30,000 Americans killed, until an armistice ended the fighting in 1953.[222] In February 1952, Truman's approval mark stood at 22 percent according to Gallup polls, which is the all-time lowest approval mark for a sitting U.S. president, though it was matched by Richard Nixon in 1974.[223][224]
Worldwide defense
 Truman and Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru during Nehru's visit to the United States, October 1949
The escalation of the Cold War was highlighted by Truman's approval of NSC 68, a secret statement of foreign policy. It called for tripling the defense budget, and the globalization and militarization of containment policy whereby the United States and its NATO allies would respond militarily to actual Soviet expansion. The document was drafted by Paul Nitze, who consulted State and Defense officials and was formally approved by President Truman as the official national strategy after the war began in Korea. It called for partial mobilization of the U.S. economy to build armaments faster than the Soviets. The plan called for strengthening Europe, weakening the Soviet Union, and building up the United States both militarily and economically.[225]
 Truman and Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi speaking at Washington National Airport, during ceremonies welcoming him to the United States
Truman was a strong supporter of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which established a formal peacetime military alliance with Canada and democratic European nations of the Western Bloc following World War II. The treaty establishing it was widely popular and easily passed the Senate in 1949; Truman appointed General Eisenhower as commander. NATO's goals were to contain Soviet expansion in Europe and to send a clear message to communist leaders that the world's democracies were willing and able to build new security structures in support of democratic ideals. The United States, Britain, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Norway, Denmark, Portugal, Iceland, and Canada were the original treaty signatories. The alliance resulted in the Soviets establishing a similar alliance, called the Warsaw Pact.[226][227]
General Marshall was Truman's principal adviser on foreign policy matters, influencing such decisions as the U.S. choice against offering direct military aid to Chiang Kai-shek and his nationalist Chinese forces in the Chinese Civil War against their communist opponents. Marshall's opinion was contrary to the counsel of almost all of Truman's other advisers; Marshall thought propping up Chiang's forces would drain U.S. resources necessary for Europe to deter the Soviets.[228] When the communists took control of the mainland, establishing the People's Republic of China and driving the nationalists to Taiwan, Truman would have been willing to maintain some relationship between the United States and the new government but Mao was unwilling.[229] Truman announced on January 5, 1950, that the United States would not engage in any dispute involving the Taiwan Strait, and that he would not intervene in the event of an attack by the PRC.[230]
On June 27, 1950, after the outbreak of fighting in Korea, Truman ordered the U.S. Navy's Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Strait to prevent further conflict between the communist government on the China mainland and the Republic of China (ROC) on Taiwan.[231][232]
Truman usually worked well with his top staff   the exceptions were Israel in 1948 and Spain in 1945 1950. Truman was a very strong opponent of Francisco Franco, the right-wing dictator of Spain. He withdrew the American ambassador (but diplomatic relations were not formally broken), kept Spain out of the UN, and rejected any Marshall Plan financial aid to Spain. However, as the Cold War escalated, support for Spain was strong in Congress, the Pentagon, the business community and other influential elements especially Catholics and cotton growers.
Liberal opposition to Spain had faded after the Wallace element broke with the Democratic Party in 1948; the CIO became passive on the issue. As Secretary of State Acheson increased his pressure on Truman, the president stood alone in his administration as his own top appointees wanted to normalize relations. When China entered the Korean War and pushed American forces back, the argument for allies became irresistible. Admitting he was "overruled and worn down," Truman relented and sent an ambassador and made loans available.[233]
Soviet espionage and McCarthyism
 Official portrait of President Truman by Greta Kempton, c. 1945
In August 1948, Whittaker Chambers, a former spy for the Soviets and a senior editor at Time magazine, testified before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). He said an underground communist network had worked inside the U.S. government during the 1930s, of which Chambers had been a member, along with Alger Hiss, until recently a senior State Department official. Chambers did not allege any spying during the Truman presidency. Although Hiss denied the allegations, he was convicted in January 1950 for perjury for denials under oath.
The Soviet Union's success in exploding an atomic weapon in 1949 and the fall of the nationalist Chinese the same year led many Americans to conclude subversion by Soviet spies was responsible and to demand that communists be rooted out from the government and other places of influence.[234][235] Hoping to contain these fears, Truman began a "loyalty program" with Executive Order 9835 in 1947.[236] However, Truman got himself into deeper trouble when he called the Hiss trial a "red herring".[237][238] Wisconsin Senator Joseph McCarthy accused the State Department of harboring communists and rode the controversy to political fame,[239] leading to the Second Red Scare,[240] also known as McCarthyism. McCarthy's stifling accusations made it difficult to speak out against him. This led President Harry Truman to call McCarthy "the greatest asset the Kremlin has" by "torpedo[ing] the bipartisan foreign policy of the United States."[241]
Charges that Soviet agents had infiltrated the government were believed by 78 percent of the people in 1946 and became a major campaign issue for Eisenhower in 1952.[242] Truman was reluctant to take a more radical stance, because he felt it could threaten civil liberties and add to a potential hysteria. At the same time, he felt political pressure to indicate a strong national security.[243] It is unclear to what extent President Truman was briefed of the Venona intercepts, which discovered widespread evidence of Soviet espionage on the atom bomb project and afterward.[244][245] Truman continued his own loyalty program for some time while believing the issue of communist espionage was overstated.[244] In 1949, Truman described American communist leaders, whom his administration was prosecuting, as "traitors",[243] but in 1950 he vetoed the McCarran Internal Security Act. It was passed over his veto.[246] Truman would later state in private conversations with friends that his creation of a loyalty program had been a "terrible" mistake.[247]
Blair House and assassination attempt
Main articles: White House Reconstruction and Attempted assassination of Harry S. Truman
 View of the interior shell of the White House during renovation in 1950
In 1948, Truman ordered an addition to the exterior of the White House: a second-floor balcony in the south portico, which came to be known as the Truman Balcony. The addition was unpopular. Some said it spoiled the appearance of the south facade, but it gave the First Family more living space.[248][249] [250] Meanwhile, structural deterioration and a near-imminent collapse of the White House led to a comprehensive dismantling and rebuilding of the building's interior from 1949 to 1952. Architectural and engineering investigations during 1948 deemed it unsafe for occupancy. President Harry S. Truman, his family, and the entire residence staff were relocated across the street into Blair House during the renovations. As the newer West Wing, including the Oval Office, remained open, Truman walked to and from his work across the street each morning and afternoon.[251]
External video Newsreel scenes in English of the assassination attempt on U.S. President Harry S. Truman
On November 1, 1950, Puerto Rican nationalists Griselio Torresola and Oscar Collazo attempted to assassinate Truman at Blair House. On the street outside the residence, Torresola mortally wounded a White House policeman, Leslie Coffelt. Before he died, the officer shot and killed Torresola. Collazo was wounded and stopped before he entered the house. He was found guilty of murder and sentenced to death in 1952. Truman commuted his sentence to life in prison. To try to settle the question of Puerto Rican independence, Truman allowed a plebiscite in Puerto Rico in 1952 to determine the status of its relationship to the United States. Nearly 82 percent of the people voted in favor of a new constitution for the Estado Libre Asociado, a continued 'associated free state.'[252]
Steel and coal strikes
Further information: 1952 steel strike
In response to a labor/management impasse arising from bitter disagreements over wage and price controls, Truman instructed his Secretary of Commerce, Charles W. Sawyer, to take control of a number of the nation's steel mills in April 1952. Truman cited his authority as commander in chief and the need to maintain an uninterrupted supply of steel for munitions for the war in Korea. The Supreme Court found Truman's actions unconstitutional, however, and reversed the order in a major separation-of-powers decision, Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer (1952). The 6 3 decision, which held that Truman's assertion of authority was too vague and was not rooted in any legislative action by Congress, was delivered by a court composed entirely of justices appointed by either Truman or Roosevelt. The high court's reversal of Truman's order was one of the notable defeats of his presidency.[253]
Scandals and controversies
 Truman in an official portrait
In 1950, the Senate, led by Estes Kefauver, investigated numerous charges of corruption among senior administration officials, some of whom received fur coats and deep freezers in exchange for favors. A large number of employees of the Internal Revenue Bureau (today the IRS) were accepting bribes; 166 employees either resigned or were fired in 1950,[254] with many soon facing indictment. When Attorney General J. Howard McGrath fired the special prosecutor in early 1952 for being too zealous, Truman fired McGrath.[255] Truman submitted a reorganization plan to reform the IRB; Congress passed it, but corruption was a major issue in the 1952 presidential election.[256][257]
On December 6, 1950, Washington Post music critic Paul Hume wrote a critical review of a concert by the president's daughter Margaret Truman:
Miss Truman is a unique American phenomenon with a pleasant voice of little size and fair quality ... [she] cannot sing very well ... is flat a good deal of the time more last night than at any time we have heard her in past years ... has not improved in the years we have heard her ... [and] still cannot sing with anything approaching professional finish.[258]
Truman wrote a scathing response:
I've just read your lousy review of Margaret's concert. I've come to the conclusion that you are an 'eight ulcer man on four ulcer pay.' It seems to me that you are a frustrated old man who wishes he could have been successful. When you write such poppy-cock as was in the back section of the paper you work for it shows conclusively that you're off the beam and at least four of your ulcers are at work. Some day I hope to meet you. When that happens you'll need a new nose, a lot of beefsteak for black eyes, and perhaps a supporter below! Pegler, a gutter snipe, is a gentleman alongside you. I hope you'll accept that statement as a worse insult than a reflection on your ancestry.[258]
Truman was criticized by many for the letter. However, he pointed out that he wrote it as a loving father and not as the president.[259][260][261]
In 1951, William M. Boyle, Truman's longtime friend and chairman of the Democratic National Committee, was forced to resign after being charged with financial corruption.[262]
Civil rights
Further information: President's Committee on Civil Rights
A 1947 report by the Truman administration titled To Secure These Rights presented a detailed ten-point agenda of civil rights reforms. Speaking about this report, international developments have to be taken into account, for with the UN Charter being passed in 1945, the question of whether international human rights law could be applicable also on an inner-land basis became crucial in the United States. Though the report acknowledged such a path was not free from controversy in the 1940s United States, it nevertheless raised the possibility for the UN-Charter to be used as a legal tool to combat racial discrimination in the United States.[263]
In February 1948, the president submitted a civil rights agenda to Congress that proposed creating several federal offices devoted to issues such as voting rights and fair employment practices.[264] This provoked a storm of criticism from southern Democrats in the runup to the national nominating convention, but Truman refused to compromise, saying: "My forebears were Confederates ... but my very stomach turned over when I had learned that Negro soldiers, just back from overseas, were being dumped out of Army trucks in Mississippi and beaten."[265]
Tales of the abuse, violence, and persecution suffered by many African-American veterans upon their return from World War II infuriated Truman and were major factors in his decision to issue Executive Order 9981, in July 1948, requiring equal opportunity in the armed forces.[266] In the early 1950s after several years of planning, recommendations and revisions between Truman, the Committee on Equality of Treatment and Opportunity and the various branches of the military, the services became racially integrated.[267]
Executive Order 9980, also in 1948, made it illegal to discriminate against persons applying for civil service positions based on race. A third, in 1951, established the Committee on Government Contract Compliance, which ensured defense contractors did not discriminate because of race.[268][269] In 1950 he vetoed the McCarran Internal Security Act. It was passed over his veto.[270]
Administration and cabinet
Main article: Presidency of Harry S. Truman  Administration and cabinet
Foreign policy
Main article: Foreign policy of the Harry S. Truman administration
From 1947 until 1989, world affairs were dominated by the Cold War, in which the U.S. and its allies faced the Soviet Union and its allies. There was no large-scale fighting but instead several local civil wars as well as the ever-present threat of a catastrophic nuclear war.[271][272]
Unlike Roosevelt, Truman distrusted Stalin and the Soviet Union, and did not have FDR's faith in the UN to soften major tensions. Nevertheless, he cooperated in terms of dividing control over Germany. Soviet efforts to use its army to control politics in Eastern Europe and Iran angered Washington. The final break came in 1947 when the Labour government in London could no longer afford to help Greece fight communism and asked Washington to assume responsibility for suppressing the Communist uprising there.[273][274] The result was the Truman Doctrine of 1947 48 which made it national policy to contain Communist expansion.[275]
Truman was supported by the great majority of Democrats, after he forced out the Henry Wallace faction that wanted good terms with Moscow.[276] Truman's policy had the strong support of most Republicans, who led by Senator Arthur Vandenberg overcame the isolationist Republicans led by Senator Robert A. Taft.[277]
In 1948, Truman signed the Marshall Plan, which supplied Western Europe including Germany with US$13 billion in reconstruction aid. Stalin vetoed any participation by East European nations. A similar program was operated by the United States to restore the Japanese economy. The U.S. actively sought allies, which it subsidized with military and economic "foreign aid", as well as diplomatic support. The main diplomatic initiative was the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949, committing the United States to nuclear defense of Western Europe. The result was a peace in Europe, coupled with the fear of Soviet invasion and a reliance on American protection.[278] The United States operated a worldwide network of bases for its Army, Navy and Air Force, with large contingents stationed in Germany, Japan and South Korea.[279] Washington had a weak intelligence community before 1942, and the Soviets had a very effective network of spies. The solution was to create the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 1947.[280] Economic and propaganda warfare against the communist world became part of the American toolbox.[281]
The containment policy was developed by State Department official George Kennan in 1947.[282] Kennan characterized the Soviet Union as an aggressive, anti-Western power that necessitated containment, a characterization which would shape US foreign policy for decades to come. The idea of containment was to match Soviet aggression with force wherever it occurred while not using nuclear weapons. The policy of containment created a bipolar, zero-sum world where the ideological conflicts between the Soviet Union and the United States dominated geopolitics. Due to the antagonism on both sides and each countries' search for security, a tense worldwide contest developed between the two states as the two nations' governments vied for global supremacy militarily, culturally, and politically.[283]
The Cold War was characterized by a lack of global hot wars Instead there were proxy wars, fought by client states and proxies of the United States and Soviet Union. The most important was Korean War (1950 1953), a stalemate that drained away Truman's base of support. Truman made five international trips during his presidency.[284]
1952 election
Further information: 1952 United States presidential election
 President Truman; Alabama Senator John J. Sparkman, vice presidential nominee; and Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson, presidential nominee, in the Oval Office, 1952
In 1951, the United States ratified the 22nd Amendment, making a president ineligible for election to a third term or for election to a second full term after serving more than two remaining years of a term of a previously elected president. The latter clause did not apply to Truman's situation in 1952 because of a grandfather clause exempting the incumbent president.[285]
 President Truman conferring with labor leader Walter Reuther about economic policy in the Oval Office, 1952
Therefore, he seriously considered running for another term in 1952 and left his name on the ballot in the New Hampshire primary. However all his close advisors, pointing to his age, his failing abilities, and his poor showing in the polls, talked him out of it.[286] At the time of the 1952 New Hampshire primary, no candidate had won Truman's backing. His first choice, Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson, had declined to run; Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson had also turned Truman down, Vice President Barkley was considered too old,[287][288] and Truman distrusted and disliked Senator Kefauver, who had made a name for himself by his investigations of the Truman administration scandals.
Truman let his name be entered in the New Hampshire primary by supporters. The highly unpopular Truman was handily defeated by Kefauver; 18 days later the president formally announced he would not seek a second full term. Truman was eventually able to persuade Stevenson to run, and the governor gained the nomination at the 1952 Democratic National Convention.[289]
Harry S. Truman's Farewell Address
Truman's speech on leaving office, and returning home to Independence, Missouri. (January 15, 1953)
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Eisenhower gained the Republican nomination, with Senator Nixon as his running mate, and campaigned against what he denounced as Truman's failures: "Korea, communism and corruption". He pledged to clean up the "mess in Washington," and promised to "go to Korea."[287][288] Eisenhower defeated Stevenson decisively in the general election, ending 20 years of Democratic presidents. While Truman and Eisenhower had previously been on good terms, Truman felt annoyed that Eisenhower did not denounce Joseph McCarthy during the campaign.[290] Similarly, Eisenhower was outraged when Truman accused the former general of disregarding "sinister forces ... Anti-Semitism, anti-Catholicism, and anti-foreignism" within the Republican Party.[291]
Post-presidency (1953 1972)
Financial situation
 Truman and his wife Bess attend the signing of the Medicare Bill on July 30, 1965, by President Lyndon B. Johnson
Before being elected as Jackson County judge, Truman had earned little money, and was in debt from the failure of his haberdashery. His election as senator in 1934 carried with it a salary of $10,000 (about $210,000 in 2022), high for the time, but the need to maintain two homes, with one in expensive Washington, Margaret Truman's college expenses, and contributions to the support of needy relatives, left the Trumans little extra money. He probably had about $7,500 in cash and government bonds when nominated for vice president.[292]
His finances were transformed by his accession to the presidency, which carried with it a salary of $75,000 ($1.24 million in 2022), which was increased to $100,000 in 1949 (about $1.25 million in 2022). This was more than any Major League Baseball star except Joe DiMaggio, who also earned $100,000 in his final two seasons (1950 and 1951). Beginning in 1949, the president was also granted a $50,000 expense allowance ($589,000 in 2022), which was initially tax-free, and did not have to be accounted for. Although the allowance became taxable later in his presidency, Truman never reported it on his tax return, and converted some of the funds to cash he kept in the White House safe and later in a safe deposit box in Kansas City.[292]
Upon leaving the presidency, Truman returned to Independence, Missouri, to live at the Wallace home he and Bess had shared for years with her mother.[293] In a biography that contributed greatly to the myth that Truman was near penury after departing the White House,[292] David McCullough stated that the Trumans had little alternative than to return to Independence, for his only income was his army pension of $112.56 per month (equivalent to $1,140 in 2021), and he had only been able to save a modest amount from his salary as president.[294] In February 1953, Truman signed a book deal for his memoirs, and in a draft will dated December of that year listed land worth $250,000, savings bonds of the same amount, and cash of $150,000.[292] He wrote, "Bonds, land, and cash all come from savings of presidential salary and free expense account. It should keep you and Margaret comfortably."[292]
The writing of the memoirs was a struggle for Truman and he went through a dozen collaborators during the project,[295] not all of whom served him well,[296] but he remained heavily involved in the result.[297] For the memoirs, Truman received a payment of $670,000 (equivalent to $6,777,404 in 2021).[298] The memoirs were a commercial and critical success.[299][300] They were published in two volumes: Memoirs by Harry S. Truman: Year of Decisions (1955) and Memoirs by Harry S. Truman: Years of Trial and Hope (1956).[301][302]
Former members of Congress and the federal courts received a federal retirement package; President Truman himself ensured that former servants of the executive branch of government received similar support. In 1953, however, there was no such benefit package for former presidents, and Congressional pensions were not approved until 1946, after Truman had left the Senate, so he received no pension for his Senate service.[303] Truman, behind the scenes, lobbied for a pension, writing to congressional leaders that he had been near penury but for the sale of family farmlands, and in February 1958, in the first televised interview of a former US president that aired on CBS, Truman claimed that "If I hadn't inherited some property that finally paid things through, I'd be on relief right now."[292] That year, Congress passed the Former Presidents Act, offering a $25,000 (equivalent to $234,804 in 2021) yearly pension to each former president, and it is likely that Truman's claim to be in difficult financial straits played a role in the law's enactment.[304] The only other living former president at the time, Herbert Hoover, also took the pension, even though he did not need the money; reportedly, he did so to avoid embarrassing Truman.[305]
Truman's net worth improved further in 1958 when he and his siblings sold most of the family farm to a Kansas City real estate developer.[306] When he was serving as a county judge, Truman borrowed $31,000 (equivalent to $313,971 in 2021) by mortgaging the farm to the county school fund, which was legal at the time.[306] When Republicans controlled the court in 1940, they foreclosed in an effort to embarrass Truman politically, and his mother and sister Mary Jane had to vacate the home.[306] In 1945, Truman organized a syndicate of supporters who purchased the farm with the understanding that they would sell it back to the Trumans.[306] Harry and Vivian Truman purchased 87 acres in 1945, and Truman purchased another portion in 1946.[306] In January 1959, Truman calculated his net worth as $1,046,788.86 ($10.71 million in 2022), including a share in the Los Angeles Rams football team. Nevertheless, the Trumans always lived modestly in Independence, and when Bess Truman died in 1982, almost a decade after her husband, the house was found to be in poor condition due to deferred maintenance.[292]
Bess Truman's personal papers were made public in 2009,[307] including financial records and tax returns. The myth that Truman had been in straitened circumstances after his presidency was slow to dissipate; Paul Campos wrote in 2021, "The current, 20,000-plus-word Wikipedia biography of Truman goes so far as to assert that, because his earlier business ventures had failed, Truman left the White House with 'no personal savings.' Every aspect of this narrative is false."[292][g]
Truman Library and academic positions
See also: Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum
Truman's predecessor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, had organized his own presidential library, but legislation to enable future presidents to do something similar had not been enacted. Truman worked to garner private donations to build a presidential library, which he donated to the federal government to maintain and operate a practice adopted by his successors.[308]
He testified before Congress to have money appropriated to have presidential papers copied and organized, and was proud of the bill's passage in 1957. Max Skidmore, in his book on the life of former presidents, wrote that Truman was a well-read man, especially in history. Skidmore added that the presidential papers legislation and the founding of his library "was the culmination of his interest in history. Together they constitute an enormous contribution to the United States one of the greatest of any former president."[309]
Truman taught occasional courses at universities, including Yale, where he was a Chubb Fellow visiting lecturer in 1958.[310] In 1962, Truman was a visiting lecturer at Canisius College.[311]
Politics
Truman supported Adlai Stevenson's second bid for the White House in 1956, although he had initially favored Democratic governor W. Averell Harriman of New York.[312] He continued to campaign for Democratic senatorial candidates for many years.[313]
In 1960 Truman gave a public statement announcing he would not attend the Democratic Convention that year, citing concerns about the way that the supporters of John F. Kennedy had gained control of the nominating process, and called on Kennedy to forgo the nomination for that year.[314] Kennedy responded with a press conference where he bluntly rebuffed Truman's advice.[315]
Despite his supportive stance on civil rights during his presidency, Truman expressed criticism of the civil rights movement during the 1960s. In 1960, he stated that he believed the sit-in movement to be part of a Soviet plot.[316] Truman's statement garnered a response from Martin Luther King Jr., who wrote a letter to Truman stating that he was "baffled" by Truman's accusation, and demanded a public apology.[317] Truman would later criticize King following the Selma march in 1965, believing the protest to be "silly" and claiming that it "[couldn't] accomplish a darn thing except to attract attention."[318] In 1963, Truman voiced his opposition to interracial marriage, believing that daughters of white people would never love someone of an opposite color.[319][320]
Upon turning 80 in 1964, Truman was feted in Washington, and addressed the Senate, availing himself of a new rule that allowed former presidents to be granted privilege of the floor.[321]
Medicare
After a fall in his home in late 1964, Truman's physical condition declined. In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Medicare bill at the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum and gave the first two Medicare cards to Truman and his wife Bess to honor the former president's fight for government health care while in office.[313]
Death
 Wreath by Truman's casket, December 27, 1972
On December 5, 1972, Truman was admitted to Kansas City's Research Hospital and Medical Center with pneumonia. He developed multiple organ failure, fell into a coma, and died at 7:50 a.m. on December 26, at the age of 88.[322][293]
Bess Truman opted for a simple private service at the library rather than a state funeral in Washington. A week after the funeral, foreign dignitaries and Washington officials attended a memorial service at Washington National Cathedral.[323]
Bess Truman died in 1982 and was buried next to her husband at the Harry S. Truman Library and Museum in Independence, Missouri.[324][325]
Tributes and legacy
Legacy
 Former President Harry Truman with "The Buck Stops Here" sign on a recreation of his Oval Office desk
When he left office in 1953, Truman was one of the most unpopular chief executives in history. His job approval rating of 22% in the Gallup Poll of February 1952 was lower than Richard Nixon's 24% in August 1974, the month that Nixon resigned. American public feeling towards Truman grew steadily warmer with the passing years; as early as 1962, a poll of 75 historians conducted by Arthur M. Schlesinger, Sr. ranked Truman among the "near great" presidents. The period following his death consolidated a partial rehabilitation of his legacy among both historians and members of the public.[326] Truman died when the nation was consumed with crises in Vietnam and Watergate, and his death brought a new wave of attention to his political career.[218] In the early and mid-1970s, Truman captured the popular imagination much as he had in 1948, this time emerging as a kind of political folk hero, a president who was thought to exemplify an integrity and accountability many observers felt was lacking in the Nixon White House. This public reassessment of Truman was aided by the popularity of a book of reminiscences which Truman had told to journalist Merle Miller beginning in 1961, with the agreement that they would not be published until after Truman's death.[327]
Truman had his latter-day critics as well. After a review of information available to Truman about the presence of espionage activities in the U.S. government, Democratic Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan concluded that Truman was "almost willfully obtuse" concerning the danger of American communism.[328] In 2010, historian Alonzo Hamby concluded that "Harry Truman remains a controversial president."[329] However, since leaving office, Truman has fared well in polls ranking the presidents. He has never been listed lower than ninth, and most recently was fifth in a C-SPAN poll in 2009.[330]
The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 caused Truman advocates to claim vindication for Truman's decisions in the postwar period. According to Truman biographer Robert Dallek, "His contribution to victory in the cold war without a devastating nuclear conflict elevated him to the stature of a great or near-great president."[331] The 1992 publication of David McCollough's favorable biography of Truman further cemented the view of Truman as a highly regarded chief executive.[331] According to historian Daniel R. McCoy in his book on the Truman presidency,
Harry Truman himself gave a strong and far-from-incorrect impression of being a tough, concerned and direct leader.  He was occasionally vulgar, often partisan, and usually nationalistic ... On his own terms, Truman can be seen as having prevented the coming of a third world war and having preserved from Communist oppression much of what he called the free world.  Yet clearly he largely failed to achieve his Wilsonian aim of securing perpetual peace, making the world safe for democracy, and advancing opportunities for individual development internationally.[332]
Sites and honors
 Stamp issued in 1973, following Truman's death Truman has been honored on five U.S. postage stamps, issued from 1973 to 1999.[333]
In 1956, Truman traveled to Europe with his wife. In Britain, he received an honorary degree in Civic Law from Oxford University and met with Winston Churchill.[312] In 1959, he was given a 50-year award by the Masons, recognizing his longstanding involvement: he was initiated on February 9, 1909, into the Belton Freemasonry Lodge in Missouri. In 1911, he helped establish the Grandview Lodge, and he served as its first Worshipful Master. In September 1940, during his Senate re-election campaign, Truman was elected Grand Master of the Missouri Grand Lodge of Freemasonry; Truman said later that the Masonic election assured his victory in the general election. In 1945, he was made a 33  Sovereign Grand Inspector General and an Honorary Member of the supreme council at the Supreme Council A.A.S.R. Southern Jurisdiction Headquarters in Washington D.C. [334][335] Truman was also a member of Sons of the American Revolution (SAR)[336] and a card-carrying member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans.[337] Two of his relatives were Confederate soldiers.[337][338]
In 1975, the Truman Scholarship was created as a federal program to honor U.S. college students who exemplified dedication to public service and leadership in public policy.[339]
In 1983 the Harry S. Truman State Office Building in Jefferson City was completed.[340]
In 2004, the President Harry S. Truman Fellowship in National Security Science and Engineering was created as a distinguished postdoctoral three-year appointment at Sandia National Laboratories.[341] In 2001, the University of Missouri established the Harry S. Truman School of Public Affairs to advance the study and practice of governance.[342] The University of Missouri's Missouri Tigers athletic programs have an official mascot named Truman the Tiger. On July 1, 1996, Northeast Missouri State University became Truman State University to mark its transformation from a teachers' college to a highly selective liberal arts university and to honor the only Missourian to become president. A member institution of the City Colleges of Chicago, Harry S Truman College in Chicago, Illinois, is named in his honor for his dedication to public colleges and universities. In 2000, the headquarters for the State Department, built in the 1930s but never officially named, was dedicated as the Harry S Truman Building.[343]
Despite Truman's attempt to curtail the naval carrier arm, which led to the 1949 Revolt of the Admirals,[344] an aircraft carrier is named after him. The USS Harry S. Truman (CVN-75) was christened on September 7, 1996. [345] The 129th Field Artillery Regiment is designated "Truman's Own" in recognition of Truman's service as commander of its D Battery during World War I.[346]
In 1991, Truman was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians, and a bronze bust depicting him is on permanent display in the rotunda of the Missouri State Capitol. In 2006, Thomas Daniel, grandson of the Trumans, accepted a star on the Missouri Walk of Fame to honor his late grandfather. In 2007, John Truman, a nephew, accepted a star for Bess Truman. The Walk of Fame is in Marshfield, Missouri, a city Truman visited in 1948.[347]
A statue of Harry S. Truman was installed in the U.S. Capitol, in Washington, D.C., on September 29, 2022, as part of the National Statuary Hall Collection.[348]
Other sites associated with Truman include:
Harry S. Truman National Historic Site includes the Wallace House at 219 N. Delaware in Independence and the family farmhouse at Grandview, Missouri (Truman sold most of the farm for Kansas City suburban development including the Truman Corners Shopping Center).
Harry S. Truman Birthplace State Historic Site is the house where Truman was born and spent 11 months in Lamar, Missouri.[349]
Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum  The Presidential library in Independence
Harry S. Truman Little White House  Truman's winter getaway at Key West, Florida
See also
Electoral history of Harry S. Truman
Truman (film)
Truman Day
List of members of the American Legion
List of presidents of the United States
"Harry Truman", a 1975 hit song by the band Chicago
Notes
^ Truman was vice president under Franklin D. Roosevelt and became president upon Roosevelt's death on April 12, 1945. As this was prior to the adoption of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in 1967, a vacancy in the office of vice president was not filled until the next ensuing election and inauguration.
^ a b Truman was given the initial S as a middle name. There is disagreement over whether the period after the S should be included or omitted, or if both forms are equally valid. Truman's own archived correspondence shows that he regularly used the period when writing his name.[6]
^ Truman hald several leadership positions at the local and state level and in 1940 was elected to a one year term as Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Missouri.[83] In October 1945 he received the 33rd degree of the Scottish Rite.[83]
^ Truman was a founder of the Reserve Officers Association and organized Missouri's first chapter, Chapter 1.[84]
^ Truman organized the first American Legion post in Missouri, aided in organizing several others, and attended numerous annual conventions as a delegate.[85]
^ For example, see Fussell, Paul (1988). "Thank God for the Atomic Bomb". Thank God for the Atomic Bomb and Other Essays. New York Summit Books.
^ That claim was removed from this article on August 1, 2021, with this edit.
References
^ a b Ferrell 1994, p. 108.
^ "County Judges 1923 1972". County History: County Judges. Kansas City, Missouri: Jackson County, Missouri. 2018. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2018.
^ a b "County Judges 1923 1972".
^ a b Ferrell 1994, p. 99.
^ "County Judges 1826 1922". County History: County Judges. Kansas City, Missouri: Jackson County, Missouri. 2018. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2018.
^ "Use of the Period After the "S" in Harry S. Truman's Name". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved April 13, 2021.
^ Hamby, Alonzo L. (October 4, 2016). "Harry S. Truman: Life in Brief". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Retrieved February 2, 2022.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 37.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 27, 37.
^ Niel Johnson; Verna Gail Johnson (1999). "Rooted in History: The Genealogy of Harry S. Truman". Harry S. Truman Library   Genealogy. Retrieved May 6, 2018..
^ "Ulster-Scots and the United States Presidents" (PDF). Ulster Scots Agency. Retrieved July 12, 2010.
^ Truman Library, Birth 2012.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 37, 77, 1112.
^ Devine, Michael J. (2009). Harry S. Truman, the State of Israel, and the Quest for Peace in the Middle East. Truman State Univ Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-1-935503-80-4.
^ Schultz, Joseph P. (1982). Mid-America's Promise: A Profile of Kansas City Jewry. Jewish Community Foundation of Greater Kansas City. p. 33.
^ "San Francisco Jewish Bulletin, Volume 129". Jewish Community Publications. 1979. p. v.
^ a b c Oshinsky 2004, pp. 365 380.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 52.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 38.
^ Ferrell 1994, p. 87.
^ Truman Library & 2012aa.
^ Ferrell 1994, pp. 25 26.
^ "Harry S. Truman: Kansas City Star Building". Harry S. Truman Library. Independence, MO: National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved July 18, 2021.
^ Truman Library, Job 2012.
^ "Commerce Bancshares, Inc. Records: Dates: 1903 1999". Harry S. Truman Library. Independence, MO: National Archives and Records Administration. 2002. Retrieved July 18, 2021.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 67, 99.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 78 79.
^ Ferrell 1994, pp. 52, 53, 79.
^ KirKendall, Richard Stewart (1989). The Harry S. Truman Encyclopedia. Boston: G. K. Hall. p. 40. ISBN 9780816189151.
^ Danilov, Victor J. (2013). Famous Americans: A Directory of Museums, Historic Sites, and Memorials. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. p. 268. ISBN 978-0-8108-9185-2.
^ a b Hamby 1995, pp. 17 18, 135.
^ Miller, Richard Lawrence (1986). Truman: The Rise to Power. New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 206. ISBN 978-0-07-042185-1.
^ Gross, Norman (2004). America's Lawyer-Presidents: From Law Office to Oval Office. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-8101-1218-6.
^ Jackman, Tom (Kansas City Star) (September 20, 1996). "49 Years Later, Truman Gets His Law License". Tuscaloosa News. Tuscaloosa, AL. p. 1D.
^ a b c d e f Gilwee 2000.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 105.
^ Truman Library, Eye 2012.
^ "Harry S. Truman's National Guard Enlistment Papers, June 22, 1917. RG407: Records of the Adjutant General's Office: Military Personnel File of Harry S. Truman, Subject Files. Service File, 1917 1957 [1 of 3]". Harry S. Truman Presidential Library & Museum. p. 3. Retrieved May 12, 2019.[permanent dead link]
^ Ferrell, Robert H., ed. (1998). Dear Bess: The Letters from Harry to Bess Truman, 1910 1959. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press. p. 219. ISBN 978-0-8262-1203-0.
^ Offner, Arnold A. (2002). Another Such Victory: President Truman and the Cold War, 1945 1953. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-8047-4254-2.
^ a b Another Such Victory, p. 6.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 105 110.
^ Giangreco, D. M. "Capt. Harry Truman & Battery D, 129th Field Artillery In Action in the Argonne". Doughboy Center: The Story of the American Expeditionary Forces. WorldWar1.com. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
^ Current, Freidel & Williams 1971, p. 594.
^ Announcement of Harry S. Truman's Promotion to Captain, May 2, 1918
^ McCullough 1992, p. 115.
^ "Truman's Battery"
^ Burnes 2003, p. 49.
^ a b c d e f Farinacci, Donald J. (2017). Truman and MacArthur: Adversaries for a Common Cause. Hoosick Falls, NY: Merriam Press. pp. 71 72. ISBN 978-1-57638-630-9.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 130, 531.
^ Giangreco 2002, p. 192.
^ Giangreco 2002, pp. 181 186.
^ Daniels, Roger (2010). Immigration and the Legacy of Harry S. Truman. Kirksville, MO: Truman State University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-931112-99-4.
^ Espinosa, Gast n (2009). Religion and the American Presidency. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 220. ISBN 978-0-231-14333-2.
^ Nielsen, Niels C. (2009). God In The Obama Era. New York: Morgan James Publishing. pp. 152 153, 156. ISBN 978-1-60037-646-7.
^ Truman, Harry S. (March 19, 1911). "Letter from Harry S. Truman to Bess Wallace". Letter to Bess Wallace. Retrieved March 24, 2022.
^ Tiernan, L. Curtis. "Biographical Sketch, L. Curtis Tiernan". Monsignor L. Curtis Tiernan Papers. Independence, MO: Harry S. Truman Presidential Library & Museum. Retrieved May 21, 2018.
^ "Biographical Sketch, L. Curtis Tiernan".
^ "FAQ: Was President Truman the first Baptist president?". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2016..
^ Spalding, Elizabeth Edwards (2009), "Religion and the presidency of Harry S. Truman",  in Espinosa, Gast n (ed.), Religion and the American Presidency: George Washington to George W. Bush, pp. 219 249.
^ Sobel, Robert (1990). Biographical Directory of the United States Executive Branch, 1774 1989. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p. 358. ISBN 978-0-313-26593-8. harry s truman discharged major 1919.
^ "United States Army Officers' Reserve Corps Commission for Harry S. Truman, March 20, 1920". From Soldier to Senator: Harry S. Truman, 1918 1941. Independence, MO: Harry S. Truman Library and Museum. Retrieved April 23, 2022.
^ Pullen, Randy (1999). "Twice the Citizen And Then Some". Army Reserve Magazine. Washington DC: U.S. Army Reserve: 12.
^ Clay, Steven E. (2010). US Army Order of Battle, 1919 1941. Ft. Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press. p. 878. ISBN 9780984190140.
^ Tucker, Frank (December 1, 2010). "Army History: Truman, you're too old ...". Gateway Today. St. Louis: Association of the United States Army, St. Louis Chapter. pp. 5 8.
^ a b Army History: Truman, you're too old
^ Maddox, Robert James (2007). Hiroshima in History: The Myths of Revisionism. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-8262-1732-5.
^ "Biographical Sketch: Harry S. Truman, 33rd President of the United States". Trumanlibrary.org. Harry S. Truman Library and Museum. Retrieved May 27, 2016.
^ Pullen, Twice the Citizen
^ "Harry S. Truman Military Personnel File". Record Group 407. Washington DC: National Archives. 1917 1973. Retrieved December 17, 2018   via Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum.
^ Truman Library 1919.
^ Goldstein 2008.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 63 64, 68.
^ a b Ferrell 1994, p. 88.
^ Ferrell 1994, p. 86.
^ Hamby 1995, pp. 410 412.
^ a b Dallek 2008, p. 6.
^ Barr 2004.
^ Savage 1991, p. 65.
^ Golway, Terry (2011). Give 'em Hell: The Tumultuous Years of Harry Truman's Presidency, in His Own Words and Voice. Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks, Inc. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-4022-1715-9   via Google Books.
^ a b "Truman as the Collector: County Place May Be Sought Instead of One in Congress". The Kansas City Star. Kansas City, MO. January 4, 1934. p. 1   via Newspapers.com.
^ a b United States Senate 2012.
^ a b "Grandview Masonic Lodge 618". Harry S. Truman Library and Museum. Independence, MO: National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved June 28, 2022.
^ Wright, Tom, ed. (July August 1984). "ROA Conclave". The Air Reservist. Bolling Air Force Base, Washington, DC: Headquarters, United States Air Force. p. 29   via Google Books.
^ Olson, Clarence H. (1963). Summary of the Proceedings of the Forty-fourth Annual Convention of the American Legion. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 98   via Google Books.
^ Kirkendall 1989, p. 27.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 7 9.
^ a b c Winn.
^ Time & January 8, 1973.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 232.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 230.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 11 12.
^ Hamby 1995, pp. 236 247.
^ Alexrod, Alan (2009). The Real History of the Cold War: A New Look at the Past. Sterling. p. 44. ISBN 9781402763021.
^ "     .      " (in Russian).  . . July 23, 2017.
^ "       " (in Russian).  . March 2021.
^ Michael James Lacey (1991). The Truman Presidency. pp. 35 36. ISBN 9780521407731.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 12 14.
^ Herman, Arthur (2012), Freedom's Forge: How American Business Produced Victory in World War II, New York: Random House, pp. 103, 118, 194, 198 199, 235 236, 275, 281, 303, 312, ISBN 978-1-4000-6964-4.
^ Life & November 30, 1942.
^ Zuberi, Matin (August 2001). "Atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki". Strategic Analysis. 25 (5): 623 662. doi:10.1080/09700160108458986. S2CID 154800868.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 337 338: "Later estimates were that the Truman Committee saved the country as much as $15 billion."
^ McDonald 1984: "This committee saved billions in taxpayers' money by helping eliminate waste and fraud."
^ Daniels 1998, p. 228: Jonathan W. Daniels quotes journalist Marquis Childs who wrote in November 1942 that the Truman Committee had "saved billions yes, billions of dollars."
^ Hamilton 2009, p. 301: "Over seven years (1941 1948) the committee heard from 1,798 witnesses during 432 public hearings. It published nearly two thousand pages of documents and saved perhaps $15 billion and thousands of lives by exposing faulty airplane and munitions production."
^ Time 2012.
^ Senate Truman Committee 2012.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 373 378.
^ a b c Burnes 2003, p. 131.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 14 16.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 15 17.
^ U.S. Senate: About the Vice President | Harry S. Truman, 34th Vice President (1945)
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 333 336.
^ Occasions When Vice Presidents Have Voted to Break Tie Votes in the Senate, Senate Historical Office, United States Senate, p. 7.
^ Harold Foote Gosnell, Truman's Crises: A Political Biography of Harry S. Truman (Greenwood Press, 1980), p. 212: "On only one occasion did [Truman] break a tie, and this was when his negative vote defeated a Taft amendment to the Lend-Lease Act which would have prevented postwar delivery of lend-lease goods contracted for during the war."
^ Robert C. Byrd, Senate, 1789 1989, Vol. 1: Addresses on the History of the United States Senate (Government Printing Office, 1988), p. 534: "In his eighty-two days as vice president, he had the opportunity to vote only once on an amendment to limit the Lend-Lease extension bill. The vote was tied, and Truman voted no, which, in a sense, was unnecessary since the bill would have died even without his vote."
^ Dallek 2008, p. 16.
^ a b U.S. History 2012.
^ Schwab, Nick (August 13, 2014). "Lauren Bacall and Harry Truman's Piano Moment Led to Bigger Things". US News. Retrieved December 17, 2016.
^ Truman Library 2012h.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 425.
^ Goodwin 1994, p. 478.
^ Paul Ham, Hiroshima Nagasaki, p. 68
^ Alonzo Hamby, "Truman, Harry S." in The Encyclopedia of the American Presidency edited by Leonard Levy and Louis Fisher (vol 4 1994) pp. 1497 1505.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 366.
^ Hamby 1995, pp. 301 302, 472.
^ Hamby 1995, pp. 474.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 511.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 436.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 348.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 21 22.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 19 20.
^ Reynolds 2005.
^ Alexrod, Alan. The Real History of the Cold War: A New Look at the Past. Sterling. p. 56.
^ PBS 2012.
^ Truman 1955, p. 416.
^ McCoy 1984, p. 37.
^ "Total Casualties   The Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki". atomicarchive.com. Retrieved December 16, 2016.
^ Miller 1974, pp. 227 231.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 24 28.
^ Kramer, Ronald C; Kauzlarich, David (2011),  Rothe, Dawn; Mullins, Christopher W (eds.), "Nuclear weapons, international law, and the normalization of state crime", State crime: Current perspectives, pp. 94 121, ISBN 978-0-8135-4901-9.
^ Ryall, Julian (June 4, 2015). "US museum must call Hiroshima and Nagasaki 'war crimes', say Japanese". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2018.
^ " 70    IWJ Independent Web Journal". iwj.co.jp. August 6, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2018.
^ October 14, 1948 address in "Harry S. Truman: Address in Milwaukee, Wisconsin". www.presidency.ucsb.edu. Retrieved June 8, 2018.
^ Lambers, William (May 30, 2006). Nuclear Weapons. William K Lambers. p. 11. ISBN 0-9724629-4-5.
^ Daniel DiSalvo, "The politics of a party faction: The Liberal-Labor alliance in the Democratic Party, 1948 1972." Journal of Policy History 22.3 (2010): 269 299.
^ a b c Miller Center 2012.
^ "Rail Strike Paralyzes Entire U.S." Universal Studios. May 23, 1946.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 501 506.
^ Acacia, John (2009). Clark Clifford: The Wise Man of Washington. p. 22. ISBN 978-0813139258.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 64 65.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 48 50.
^ McCoy 1984, p. 91.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 96 102.
^ Markel, Howard (2015), "'Give 'Em Health, Harry'", Milbank Quarterly, 93 (1): 1 7, doi:10.1111/1468-0009.12096, PMC 4364422, PMID 25752341.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 84 86.
^ Binning, Esterly & Sracic 1999, p. 417.
^ Lamb, Charles M; Nye, Adam W (2012), "Do Presidents Control Bureaucracy? The Federal Housing Administration during the Truman Eisenhower Era", Political Science Quarterly, 127 (3): 445 467, doi:10.1002/j.1538-165x.2012.tb00734.x, JSTOR 23563185.
^ Neustadt 1954, pp. 349 381.
^ Hamby 1995, p. 310.
^ Roosevelt 1961.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 56 57.
^ James M. McCormick, and Eugene R. Wittkopf. "Bipartisanship, partisanship, and ideology in congressional-executive foreign policy relations, 1947 1988." Journal of Politics 52.4 (1990): 1077 1100.
^ Freeland 1970, p. 90.
^ Roberts 2000.
^ Holsti 1996, p. 214.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 62 63.
^ May, Ernest R. (2002) "1947 48: When Marshall Kept the U.S. out of War in China." Journal of Military History 66#4: 1001 1010. online
^ Truman Library 1988a.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 595 597.
^ a b McCullough 1992, p. 599.
^ Ottolenghi 2004, pp. 963 988.
^ Baylis, Thomas. How Israel was Won: A Concise History of the Arab-Israeli Conflict, p. 55 (Lexington Books, Rowman and Littlefield, 1999).
^ Holmes, David. The Faiths of the Postwar Presidents: From Truman to Obama, pp. 16 17. (U. Georgia Press, 2012).
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 604 605.
^ Lenczowski 1990, p. 26.
^ Truman Library 1948.
^ Berdichevsky 2012.
^ "Fair Employment Practices Committee". Encyclop dia Britannica.
^ Glass, Andrew (June 29, 2018). "Truman addresses NAACP, June 29, 1947". Politico. Retrieved July 27, 2021.
^ Milkis, Sidney M.; Nelson, Michael (2021). The American Presidency: Origins and Development, 1776 2021. CQ Press. p. 1946. ISBN 978-1-0718-2463-4.
^ Hechler & Elsey 2006.
^ Burnes 2003, p. 137.
^ Harvard Sitkoff, "Harry Truman and the election of 1948: The coming of age of civil rights in American politics." Journal of Southern History 37.4 (1971): 597 616.
^ Hamby 2008.
^ "Harry S. Truman: Address in St. Paul at the Municipal Auditorium". presidency.ucsb.edu. Retrieved October 29, 2018.
^ "A quote by Harry Truman". goodreads.com.
^ "President Harry Truman on Republicans". October 5, 2012.
^ The Editorial Board (November 24, 2017). "Opinion   When a Tax Cut Costs Millions Their Medical Coverage". The New York Times.
^ Morris J. MacGregor, Jr., Integration of the Armed Forces 1940 1965 (Center of Military History, 1981) ch 12 online.
^ Jon Taylor, Freedom to Serve: Truman, Civil Rights, and Executive Order 9981 (Routledge, 2013). 
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 153 158.
^ Pietrusza 2011, pp. 226 232.
^ "Footnotes on Political Battles of 1948". Truman's Library. Truman's Library. Archived from the original on February 5, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2016.
^ Bray, William J. "Recollections of the 1948 Campaign". Truman's Library. Truman's Library. Archived from the original on February 5, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2016.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 654.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 657.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 701.
^ Bennett 2012.
^ Truman Library 1971.
^ Jones 2020.
^ United States Senate 2005.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 747 749.
^ Young & Schilling 2019, pp. 1 2.
^ Young & Schilling 2019, pp. 152 159.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 756 758.
^ Young & Schilling 2019, p. 165.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 762 764.
^ Atomic Archive 1953.
^ a b McCoy 1984, pp. 222 27.
^ Truman Library, Memo 1950.
^ Dean, John (2007), Broken Government: How Republican Rule Destroyed the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial Branches, Penguin, pp. 257, 315.
^ Dallek 2008, p. 107.
^ Matray 1979, pp. 314 333.
^ Stokesbury 1990, pp. 81 90.
^ Cohen & Gooch 2006, pp. 165 195.
^ Stokesbury 1990, pp. 123 129.
^ a b Time & December 3, 1973.
^ Strout 1999.
^ Weintraub 2000.
^ "How the Korean War Almost Went Nuclear".
^ Chambers II 1999, p. 849.
^ Roper 2010.
^ Presidential Job Approval for Richard Nixon at the American Presidency Project.
^ Wells 1979, pp. 116 158.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 197 199, 232.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 89 91.
^ May 2002, pp. 1001 1010.
^ Ferrell 1994, pp. 217 218, 224.
^ "Harry S Truman, "Statement on Formosa," January 5, 1950". University of Southern California. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
^ Donovan 1983, pp. 198 199.
^ Marolda, Edward J. "The Seventh Fleet in Chinese Waters". Archived from the original on May 26, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014.
^ Mark S. Byrnes,"'Overruled and Worn Down': Truman Sends an Ambassador to Spain." Presidential Studies Quarterly 29.2 (1999): 263 279.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 87 88.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 194, 217 218.
^ Hogan, Michael J. (2000). A Cross of Iron: Harry S. Truman and the Origins of the National Security State, 1945 1954. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 254 5. ISBN 9780521795371.
^ Kirkendall, Richard S. (2012). The Civil Liberties Legacy of Harry S. Truman. Truman State UP. p. 124. ISBN 9781612480848.
^ Evans 2007, p. 321.
^ Weinstein 1997, pp. 450 451.
^ Evans 2007, p. 324.
^ "President Harry S. Truman Responds to Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's Accusations of Disloyalty". historymatters.gmu.edu. Retrieved June 12, 2021.
^ Troy 2008, p. 128.
^ a b McCoy 1984, pp. 217.
^ a b "Did Truman Know about Venona?". fas.org. Retrieved June 12, 2021.
^ Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (1998). Secrecy: The American Experience. Yale University Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-300-08079-7.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 234 235.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 553.
^ White House Museum 1952.
^ Truman Library, Balcony 2012.
^ Truman Library, Balcony II 2012.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 593, 652, 725, 875ff.
^ Nohlen, Dieter (2005), Elections in the Americas: A Data Handbook, vol. I, p. 556, ISBN 978-0-19-928357-6.
^ Chong-do Hah, and Robert M. Lindquist, "The 1952 steel seizure revisited: A systematic study in presidential decision making." Administrative Science Quarterly (1975): 587 605 online.
^ Smaltz 1998.
^ Smaltz 1996.
^ McCoy 1984, p. 299.
^ Donovan 1983, pp. 116 117.
^ a b Truman Library, FAQ 1950.
^ Barnes 2008.
^ Giglio 2001, p. 112.
^ Smith 2001.
^ Eleonora W. Schoenebaum, ed. Political Profiles: The Truman Years (1978) pp. 48 49.
^ Christopher N.J.Roberts. "William H. Fitzpatrick's Editorials on Human Rights (1949)". Quellen zur Geschichte der Menschenrechte. Retrieved November 4, 2017.
^ Truman Library, Special Message 1948.
^ Truman 1973, p. 429.
^ Kirkendall 1989, pp. 10 11.
^ MacGregor 1981, pp. 312 315, 376 378, 457 459.
^ National Archives 1948.
^ National Archives 1953.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 216 217, 234 235.
^ Ralph B. Levering, The cold war, 1945 1987 (1988) online 
^ Martin McCauley, Russia, America, and the Cold War, 1949 1991 (1998), A British perspective; online
^ Robert Frazier, "Did Britain Start the Cold War? Bevin and the Truman Doctrine." Historical Journal 27.3 (1984): 715 727 online.
^ Peter Weiler, "British Labour and the Cold War: The Foreign Policy of the Labour Governments, 1945 1951." Journal of British Studies 26#1(1987): 54 82 online. 
^ John Lewis Gaddis, "Was the Truman Doctrine a Real Turning Point?." Foreign Affairs 52.2 (1974): 386 402. online
^ Alonzo L. Hamby. "Henry A. Wallace, the liberals, and Soviet-American relations." Review of Politics 30.2 (1968): 153 169 [ online].
^ Lawrence J. Haas,  Harry & Arthur: Truman, Vandenberg, and the Partnership That Created the Free World (Potomac Books, 2016).
^ Mark J. Smith, NATO Enlargement During the Cold War: Strategy and System in the Western Alliance (2000).
^ Kent E. Calder, Embattled garrisons: Comparative base politics and American globalism (2010).
^ Jeffreys Jones, Rhodri (1997). "Why was the CIA established in 1947?". Intelligence and National Security. 12: 21 40. doi:10.1080/02684529708432397.
^ Shu Guang Zhang, Economic Cold War: America's Embargo Against China and the Sino-Soviet Alliance, 1949 1963 (2002),
^ John O. Iatrides, "George F. Kennan and the birth of containment: the Greek test case." World Policy Journal 22.3 (2005): 126 145 online.
^ John Lewis Gaddis, Russia, the Soviet Union, and the United States (1990) pp 175 206. online
^ "Travels of President Harry S. Truman". U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian.
^ Find Law 2012.
^ Alonzo L. Hamby. Man of the People: A Life of Harry S. Truman (1995), pp. 602 605.
^ a b McCullough 1992, p. 887.
^ a b Ambrose 1983, p. 515.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 139 142.
^ Time & November 10, 2008.
^ Dallek 2008, p. 144.
^ a b c d e f g h Campos, Paul (July 24, 2021). "The Truman Show". New York. Retrieved July 26, 2021.
^ a b Truman Library 2012i.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 1099.
^ McCullough 1992, pp. 936 938, 945 947.
^ Ferrell 1994, p. 385.
^ Young & Schilling 2019, p. 168n5.
^ Ferrell 1994, p. 387.
^ Time & August 13, 1956.
^ McCullough 1992, p. 949; quoting Nevins 1955.
^ Truman 1955, title page.
^ Truman 1956, title page.
^ Dallek 2008, p. 150.
^ Smith 2008.
^ Martin 1960, p. 249.
^ a b c d e Burnes 2003, pp. 23 24.
^ "24,000 Pages of Bess Truman's Family Papers Are Released". The New York Times. Associated Press. February 14, 2009. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 6, 2021.
^ Burnes 2003, pp. 217 218.
^ Skidmore 2004, pp. 123 124.
^ Robert H. Ferrell, Farewell to the Chief: Former Presidents in American Public Life, 1991, page 52
^ U.S. Government Printing Office, Congressional Record, Volume 108, Part 4, 1962, page 5168.
^ a b Ohio State 2012.
^ a b Truman Library 1965.
^ President Truman, Truman Criticism of JFK on YouTube, Press Conference / July 2, 1960.
^ Senator John F. Kennedy, Kennedy Responds to Truman on YouTube, Press Conference / July 4, 1960.
^ "TRUMAN BELIEVES REDS LEAD SIT-INS; Says Communists Organized Them as They Started Sitdown Strikes in '37". The New York Times. Retrieved November 23, 2021.
^ University, Stanford; Stanford; California 94305 (July 28, 2014). "To Harry S. Truman". The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute. Retrieved November 23, 2021.
^ "MLK to Truman: Selma March 'Not Silly'". NBC News. Retrieved November 23, 2021.
^ The White House Goes South: Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, Lyndon B. Johnson, William Edward Leuchtenberg, 2005
^ Interracial Marriage and the Law, by William D. Zabel; The Atlantic, October 1965
^ McCullough 1992, p. 983.
^ "6:00 p.m." CBS Radio News. CBS. December 25, 1972. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2017   via YouTube.
^ "Harry S. Truman eulogized at National Cathedral in Washington". United Press International. Retrieved December 24, 2022.
^ Washington National Cathedral 2012.
^ Wooten 1973, p. 1.
^ Wisconsin Magazine of History & Autumn 1975.
^ Dallek 2008, pp. 149, 152.
^ Moynihan 1997.
^ Hamby 2002.
^ C-SPAN 2009.
^ a b Dallek 2008, p. 152.
^ McCoy 1984, pp. 318 319.
^ Kloetzel & Charles 2012, pp. 50, 61, 71, 91, 99.
^ Grand Lodge-Pennsylvania 2011.
^ Time & March 24, 1952.
^ Truman Library, SAR 2012.
^ a b Missouri Partisan Ranger 1995.
^ Eakin & Hale 1995, p. 71.
^ Truman Scholarship 2012.
^ "Harry S Truman State Office Building". July 10, 2014.
^ Truman Fellowship 2012.
^ Truman School of Public Affairs 2010.
^ CNN 2000.
^ Time & October 17, 1949.
^ NavSource Online 2012.
^ Army National Guard 2012.
^ Hall of Famous Missourians 2012.
^ Figueroa, Ariana (September 29, 2022). "Statue of Missouri's Harry S. Truman dedicated at the U.S. Capitol". Nebraska Examiner. Archived from the original on September 30, 2022. Retrieved October 5, 2022.
^ Truman Birthplace 2012.
Bibliography
Main articles: Bibliography of Harry S. Truman and Presidency of Harry S. Truman
Biographies of Truman
Burnes, Brian (2003). Harry S. Truman: His Life and Times. Kansas City, MO: Kansas City Star Books. ISBN 978-0-9740009-3-0.
Dallek, Robert (2008). Harry S. Truman. New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-6938-9.
Daniels, Jonathan (1998). The Man of Independence. University of Missouri Press. ISBN 0-8262-1190-9.
Donovan, Robert J. (1983). Tumultuous Years: 1949 1953. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-01619-2.
Ferrell, Robert H. (1994). Harry S. Truman: A Life. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0-8262-1050-0.
Hamby, Alonzo L., ed. (1974). Harry S. Truman and the Fair Deal. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath & Co. ISBN 978-0-669-87080-0.
Hamby, Alonzo L. (1995). Man of the People: A Life of Harry S. Truman. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-504546-8.
Judis, John B. (2014). Genesis: Truman, American Jews, and the Origins of the Arab/Israeli Conflict. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-16109-5.
Freeland, Richard M. (1970). The Truman Doctrine and the Origins of McCarthyism. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-8147-2576-4.
Giglio, James N. (2001). Truman in Cartoon and Caricature. Kirksville, Missouri: Truman State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8138-1806-1.
Kirkendall, Richard S. (1989). Harry S. Truman Encyclopedia. Boston: G. K. Hall Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8161-8915-1.
McCoy, Donald R. (1984). The Presidency of Harry S. Truman. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-0252-0.
McCullough, David (1992). Truman. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-86920-5.
Margolies, Daniel S. ed. A Companion to Harry S. Truman (2012); 614pp; emphasis on historiography; see Sean J. Savage, "Truman in Historical, Popular, and Political Memory," pp. 9 25. excerpt
Miller, Merle (1974). Plain Speaking: An Oral Biography of Harry S. Truman. New York: Putnam Publishing. ISBN 978-0-399-11261-4.
Mitchell, Franklin D. (1998). Harry S. Truman and the News Media: Contentious Relations, Belated Respect. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 0-8262-1180-1.
Oshinsky, David M. (2004). "Harry Truman".  In Brinkley, Alan; Dyer, Davis (eds.). The American Presidency. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-38273-6.
Pietrusza, David (2011). 1948: Harry Truman's Improbable Victory and the Year That Transformed America. New York: Union Square Press. ISBN 978-1-4027-6748-7.
Scarborough, Joe (2020). Saving Freedom. New York: Harper Collins.
Books
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1983). Eisenhower: 1890 1952. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-44069-5.
Binning, William C.; Esterly, Larry E.; Sracic, Paul A. (1999). Encyclopedia of American Parties, Campaigns, and Elections. Westport, CT: Greenwood. ISBN 978-0-8131-1755-3.
Chambers II, John W. (1999). The Oxford Companion to American Military History. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-507198-0.
Cohen, Eliot A.; Gooch, John (2006). Military Misfortunes: The Anatomy of Failure in War. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-8082-2.
Current, Richard Nelson; Freidel, Frank Burt; Williams, Thomas Harry (1971). American History: A Survey. Vol. II. New York: Knopf.
Eakin, Joanne C.; Hale, Donald R., eds. (1995). Branded as Rebels. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. ASIN B003GWL8J6.
Eisler, Kim Isaac (1993). A Justice for All: William J. Brennan, Jr., and the Decisions that Transformed America. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-76787-7.
Evans, M. Stanton (2007). Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight Against America's Enemies. New York: Crown Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-23866-5.
Goodwin, Doris Kearns (1994). No Ordinary Time: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-64240-2.
Haas, Lawrence J. Harry & Arthur: Truman, Vandenberg, and the Partnership That Created the Free World (2016)
Hamilton, Lee H. (2009). "Relations between the President and Congress in Wartime".  In James A. Thurber (ed.). Rivals for Power: Presidential Congressional Relations. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-6142-7.
Holsti, Ole (1996). Public Opinion and American Foreign Policy. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-06619-3.
Kloetzel, James E.; Charles, Steve, eds. (April 2012). Scott Standard Postage Stamp Catalog. Vol. 1. Sidney, OH: Scott Publishing Co. ISBN 978-0-89487-460-4.
Lenczowski, George (1990). American Presidents and the Middle East. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-0972-7.
MacGregor, Morris J. Jr. (1981). Integration of the Armed Services 1940 1965. Washington, D.C.: Center of Military History. ISBN 978-0-16-001925-8.
Savage, Sean J. (1991). Roosevelt: The Party Leader, 1932 1945. Lexington, KY: The University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-1755-3.
Skidmore, Max J. (2004). After the White House: Former Presidents as Private Citizens (rev ed.). New York: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-29559-2.
Stohl, Michael (1988). "National Interest and State Terrorism". The Politics of Terrorism. New York: CRC Press.
Stokesbury, James L. (1990). A Short History of the Korean War. New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-688-09513-0.
Troy, Gil (2008). Leading from the Center: Why Moderates Make the Best Presidents. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-00293-1.
Weinstein, Allen (1997). Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers Case (revised ed.). New York: Random House. ISBN 0-679-77338-X.
Young, Ken; Schilling, Warner R. (2019). Super Bomb: Organizational Conflict and the Development of the Hydrogen Bomb. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-1-5017-4516-4.
Primary sources
Truman, Harry S. (1955). Memoirs: Year of Decisions. Vol. 1. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. online
  (1956). Memoirs: Years of Trial and Hope. Vol. 2. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. online v 2
  (1960). Mr. Citizen. Independence, MO: Independence Press.
Truman, Harry S. (2002).  Ferrell, Robert H. (ed.). The Autobiography of Harry S. Truman. Columbia, Missouri: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 0-8262-1445-2.
Truman, Margaret (1973). Harry S. Truman. New York: William Morrow. ISBN 978-0-688-00005-9.
Martin, Joseph William (1960). My First Fifty Years in Politics as Told to Robert J. Donovan. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Journals
Griffith, Robert, ed. (Autumn 1975). "Truman and the Historians: The Reconstruction of Postwar American history". The Wisconsin Magazine of History. 59 (1).
Hamby, Alonzo L (August 2008). "1948 Democratic Convention The South Secedes Again". Smithsonian.
Hechler, Ken; Elsey, George M. (2006). "The Greatest Upset in American Political History: Harry Truman and the 1948 Election". White House Studies (Winter).
Heaster, Brenda L. "Who's on Second: The 1944 Democratic Vice Presidential Nomination." Missouri Historical Review 80.2 (1986): 156-175.
Matray, James I. (September 1, 1979). "Truman's Plan for Victory: National Self-determination and the Thirty-eighth Parallel Decision in Korea". Journal of American History. 66 (2): 314 333. doi:10.2307/1900879. ISSN 0021-8723. JSTOR 1900879.
May, Ernest R. (2002). "1947 48: When Marshall Kept the U.S. Out of War in China" (PDF). The Journal of Military History. 66 (October 2002): 1001 1010. doi:10.2307/3093261. JSTOR 3093261. S2CID 163803120. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 27, 2020.
Neustadt, Richard E. (1954). "Congress and the Fair Deal: A Legislative Balance Sheet". Public Policy. Boston. 5. reprinted in Hamby 1974, pp. 15 42
Ottolenghi, Michael (December 2004). "Harry Truman's Recognition of Israel". Historical Journal. 47 (4): 963 988. doi:10.1017/S0018246X04004066. S2CID 159849275.
Smaltz, Donald C. (July 1998). "Independent Counsel: A View from Inside". The Georgetown Law Journal. 86 (6).
Strout, Lawrence N. (1999). "Covering McCarthyism: How the Christian Science Monitor Handled Joseph R. McCarthy, 1950 1954". Journal of Political and Military Sociology. 2001 (Summer).
Wells, Samuel F. Jr. (Autumn 1979). "Sounding the Tocsin: NSC 68 and the Soviet Threat". International Security. 4 (2): 116 158. doi:10.2307/2626746. JSTOR 2626746. S2CID 155072379.
"Truman Committee Exposes Housing Mess". Life. November 30, 1942. pp. 45 46, 48, 50, 52. Retrieved October 10, 2012.
Time
Gibbs, Nancy (November 10, 2008). "When New President Meets Old, It's Not Always Pretty". Time. Archived from the original on November 11, 2008. Retrieved September 4, 2012.
"Armed Forces: Revolt of the Admirals". Time. October 17, 1949. Archived from the original on July 13, 2007. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"The Art of the Possible". Time. June 6, 1949. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"Historical Notes: Giving Them More Hell". Time. December 3, 1973. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"The Man of Spirit". Time. August 13, 1956. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"National Affairs: Taft Hartley: How It Works and How It Has Worked". Time. October 19, 1959. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"The Presidency: The World of Harry Truman". Time. January 8, 1973. Archived from the original on May 10, 2008. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"Truman on Time Magazine Covers". Time. 2012. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"The Wonderful Wastebasket". Time. March 24, 1952. p. 3. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
The Washington Post
Barnes, Bart (January 29, 2008). "Margaret Truman Daniel Dies at Age 83". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 2, 2010.
Barr, Cameron W. (December 11, 2004). "Listing Madonna Rescued in Bethesda". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 4, 2010.
Smith, J. Y. (November 28, 2001). "Paul Hume: Music Critic Who Panned Truman Daughter's Singing and Drew Presidential Wrath". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 22, 2012.
The New York Times
Nevins, Allan (November 6, 1955). "Year of Decisions a 'volume of distinction'". The New York Times Book Review.
Weintraub, Stanley (2000). "MacArthur's War Korea and the Undoing of an American Hero". The New York Times. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
Harry S. Truman Library and Museum
McCray, Suzanne, and Tara Yglesias, eds. Wild about Harry: Everything You Have Ever Wanted to Know about the Truman Scholarship (University of Arkansas Press, 2021), how to work at this Library. online
Giangreco, D. M.; Griffin, Robert E (1988). "The Airlift Begins: Airbridge to Berlin  The Berlin Crisis of 1948, its Origins and Aftermath". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on May 6, 2016. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
Marks, Ted (1962). "Oral History Interview with Ted Marks". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 27, 2012.
Southern, Mrs. William (June 28, 1919). "Wedding of Bess Wallace and Capt. Harry S. Truman". The Examiner. Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
Strout, Richard L. (February 5, 1971). "Oral History Interview with Richard L. Strout". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 27, 2012.
Truman, Harry (May 14, 1948). "Memo recognizing the state of Israel". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on May 9, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
Truman, Harry (November 11, 1918). "WWI Letter from Harry to Bess". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved July 24, 2012.
Vest, Kathleen. "Truman's First Democratic Convention". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved November 18, 2012.
"Background Information". The Truman Balcony. Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 16, 2012.
"Background Information (Continued)". The Truman Balcony. Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018. Retrieved October 16, 2012.
"Biographical sketch of Mrs. Harry S. Truman". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
"Birthplace of Harry S. Truman". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. 1988. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"'The Buck Stops Here' Desk sign". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved September 13, 2020.
"Chronological Record of the 129th Field Artillery 1917 1919". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2012.
"Desegregation of the Armed Forces". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
"Drugstore Clerk at 14 His First Job". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
"Eleanor and Harry: The Correspondence of Eleanor Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
"FAQ: Is the letter on display that Truman wrote in defense of his daughter's singing?". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. December 6, 1950. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
"Harry S. Truman Post-Presidential Papers". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
"Harry Truman joins Battery B of the Missouri National Guard". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018. Retrieved July 27, 2012.
"Memorandum of Information for the Secretary  Blockade of Korea". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. July 6, 1950. Archived from the original on August 9, 2007. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
"Military Personnel File of Harry S. Truman". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 27, 2012.
"President Lyndon B. Johnson Signs Medicare Bill". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. July 30, 1965. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
"President Truman Addresses Congress on Proposed Health Program, Washington, D.C". This Day in Truman History. Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. November 19, 1945. Archived from the original on June 14, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2012.
McDonald, John W. (May 1984). "10 of Truman's Happiest Years Spent in Senate". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved May 10, 2014. Originally published in the Independence Examiner, Truman Centennial Edition.
"Special Message to the Congress on Civil Rights". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Archived from the original on May 9, 2020. Retrieved December 2, 2012.
"Use of the Period After the "S" in Harry S. Truman's Name". Harry S. Truman Library & Museum. Retrieved July 24, 2012.
Online sources
Roberts, Christopher N.J. (1949). "William H. Fitzpatrick's Editorials on Human Rights". Quellen zur Geschichte der Menschenrechte. Retrieved November 4, 2017., published by Arbeitskreis Menschenrechte im 20. Jahrhundert
"Special Designation Liting". Army National Guard, United States Army. Archived from the original on December 12, 2018. Retrieved September 8, 2012.
""Mike" Device is Tested". Atomic Archive. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
Bennett, Stephen Earl (May 2012). "Restoration of Confidence: Polling's Comeback from 1948". Public Opinion Pros. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved November 1, 2012.
Berdichevsky, Norman (May 2012). "Israel: From Darling of the Left to Pariah State". New English Review. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
Curran, Jeanne; Takata, Susan R. (2002). "Getting a Sample Isn't Always Easy". Dear Habermas. California State University Dominguez Hills. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved September 6, 2012.
"U.S. Constitution: Twenty-second Amendment". Find Law. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
Giangreco, D. M. (April 7, 2002). "Soldier from Independence: Harry S. Truman and the Great War". U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
Gilwee, William J. (2000). "Capt. Harry Truman, Artilleryman and Future President". Doughboy Center: The Story of the American Expeditionary Forces. Worldwar1.com. Archived from the original on June 14, 2008. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
Goldstein, Steve (January 31, 2008). "First Daughter". Obit mag. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
Hamby, Alonzo. "Presidency: How Do Historians Evaluate the Administration of Harry Truman?". History News Network. George Mason University. Retrieved September 8, 2012.
Higgs, Robert (March 1, 2004). "Truman's Attempt to Seize the Steel Industry". The Freeman. The Independent Institute. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
Jones, Tim (October 31, 2020). "Dewey defeats Truman". Chicago Tribune. p. 1. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
Miller, Henry I. (August 1, 2012). "The Nuking of Japan was a Tactical and Moral Imperative". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 4, 2012. Retrieved May 10, 2017.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (1997). "Chairman's Forward" (PDF). Moynihan Commission on Government Secrecy. Government Printing Office. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
"Reading 2: Goodwill Ambassador to the World". National Park Service. 1961. Retrieved September 1, 2012.
Reynolds, Paul (August 3, 2005). "Hiroshima arguments rage 60 years on". BBC News. Retrieved July 30, 2012.
Roberts, Geoffrey (December 2000). "Historians and the Cold War". History Today. Retrieved April 4, 2010.
Smaltz, Donald C. (January 29, 1996). "Speech Delivered by Donald C. Smaltz". University of North Texas Libraries. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
Smith, Stephanie (March 18, 2008). "Former Presidents: Federal Pension and Retirement Benefits" (PDF). U.S. Senate Congressional Research Service. Retrieved September 5, 2022.
"America in the Second World War: The Manhattan Project". U.S. History. 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2012.
"Presidential Funerals: Services Following Deaths of American Presidents". Washington National Cathedral. 2012. Archived from the original on August 13, 2012. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
Winn, Kenneth H. "It All Adds Up: Reform and the Erosion of Representative Government in Missouri, 1900 2000". Missouri Secretary of State. Retrieved July 30, 2012.
Wooten, James T. (January 6, 1973). "Truman Honored By World Notables At Cathedral Rites". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved November 1, 2012.
"American President: A Reference Resource". Miller Center, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved September 9, 2012.
"Biographical Dictionary of the Federal Judiciary". Washington, D.C.: Federal Judicial Center. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved March 4, 2012. searches run from page, "select research categories" then check "court type" and "nominating president", then select U.S. District Courts (or U.S. Circuit Courts) and also Harry Truman.
"C-SPAN Survey of Presidential Leadership". Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved April 5, 2010.
"Chapter 12: The President Intervenes". U.S. Army Center of Military History. 2012. Archived from the original on August 24, 2012. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
"Executive Order 9981, Establishing the President's Committee on Equality of Treatment and Opportunity in the Armed Services, Harry S. Truman". Federal Register. National Archives. 1948. Retrieved September 6, 2012.
"Hall of Famous Missourians". Missouri House of Representatives. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
"Harry S. Truman: 2nd Confederate President". The Missouri Partisan Ranger. 1995. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
"Harry S Truman  1948". United States Federal Archives. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
"Harry S Truman (1884 1972) Thirty-third President (1945 1952)". The Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of Pennsylvania. 2011. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
"Harry S. Truman, 34th Vice President (1945)". United States Senate. 2012. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2012.
"Harry S. Truman Birthplace State Historic Site". Missouri State Parks and Historic Sites. 2012. Archived from the original on November 25, 2010. Retrieved July 30, 2012.
"Inauguration of the President: Fact & Firsts". United States Senate. 2005. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
"Interview Transcripts: The Potsdam Conference". The American Experience. PBS. 2012. Archived from the original on April 19, 2008. Retrieved July 31, 2012.
"Job Performance Ratings for President Truman". Public Opinion Archives. Roper Center. 2010. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
"Truman Fellowship". Sandia National Laboratories. Retrieved September 8, 2012.
"Our History: A Living Memorial". Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved September 8, 2012.
"Harry S Truman School of Public Affairs". Truman School of Public Affairs, University of Missouri. Retrieved June 18, 2008.
"March 1, 1941: The Truman Committee". United States Senate. Retrieved November 18, 2012.
"Records of the Committee on Government Contract Compliance". United States Federal Archives. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
"State Department headquarters named for Harry S. Truman". CNN. Associated Press. September 22, 2000. Archived from the original on December 8, 2004. Retrieved April 4, 2010.
"Truman Reconstruction: 1948 1952". White House Museum. 1952. Retrieved September 3, 2012.
"U.S. Domestic Politics in the Early Cold War Era, 1947 1961". The Ohio State University. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
"USS Harry S. Truman (CVN-75)". NavSource Online. July 10, 2012. Retrieved September 8, 2012.
External links
Harry S. Truman  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource
Official
Harry S. Truman Library & Museum
Harry S Truman National Historic Site
White House biography
Media coverage
Harry S. Truman collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Newspaper clippings about Harry S. Truman in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW
Other
United States Congress. "Harry S. Truman (id: T000387)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
Harry S. Truman: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
Federal Bureau of Investigation Records: The Vault   Harry S. Truman
Essays on Harry S. Truman, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
The Presidents: Truman Archived December 26, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, an American Experience documentary
Works by or about Harry S. Truman at Internet Archive
Works by Harry S. Truman at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
"Life Portrait of Harry S. Truman", from C-SPAN's American presidents: Life Portraits, October 18, 1999
Appearances on C-SPAN
Harry S. Truman Personal Manuscripts
Harry S. Truman at IMDb 
Works by Harry S. Truman at Project Gutenberg
1948 election episode in CNN's Race for the White House
 This article incorporates public domain material from Records of the Adjutant General's Office. National Archives and Records Administration.
vteHarry S. Truman
33rd President of the United States (1945 1953)
34th Vice President of the United States (1945)
U.S. Senator from Missouri (1935 1945)
Presidency
1945 inauguration
1949 inauguration
Foreign policy
Potsdam Conference
Agreement on Europe
Declaration to Japan
Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Medal of Freedom
Fair Deal
Mental Health Act
National Institute of Mental Health
National School Lunch Act
Employment Act of 1946
Council of Economic Advisers
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1952
Truman Doctrine
Marshall Plan
Loyalty Order
National Security Act of 1947
Joint Chiefs of Staff
National Security Council
Air Force
Department
Central Intelligence Agency
Key West Agreement
Joint Long Range Proving Grounds
Revolt of the Admirals
Committee on Civil Rights
Integration of the Armed Forces
Housing Act of 1949
North Atlantic Treaty
NATO
Assassination attempt
Korean War
U.N. Security Council Resolutions 82, 83
Relief of Douglas MacArthur
Office of Defense Mobilization
Science Advisory Committee
1952 steel strike
1952 Puerto Rican constitutional referendum
National Security Agency
State of the Union Address (1946
1950
1952)
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Sherman Minton Supreme Court nomination
Cabinet
Truman Balcony
"The buck stops here"
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Life
Early life and career
Presidential Library, Museum, and gravesite
Missouri Office and Courtroom
Truman Committee
1944 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection
Homes
Birthplace
Harry S. Truman Farm Home
Harry S. Truman home and National Historic Site
Historic District
Blair House
Truman Little White House
Elections
United States Senate election in Missouri, 1934
1940
Democratic National Convention 1944
1948
1944 United States presidential election
1948
campaign
"Dewey Defeats Truman"
campaign song
1952 Democratic Party presidential primaries
Legacy
Bibliography
Truman Day
Harry S Truman Building
Truman Dam and Reservoir
Harry S. Truman Scholarship
Truman Sports Complex
U.S. Postage stamps
Statue of Harry S. Truman
Public image
Give 'em Hell, Harry! (1975 play and film)
Collision Course: Truman vs. MacArthur (1976 film)
Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries)
Truman (1995 film)
Truman (1997 documentary film)
The First Lady (2022 TV series)
Family
Bess Wallace Truman (wife)
Margaret Truman (daughter)
Martha Ellen Young Truman (mother)
Clifton Truman Daniel (grandson)
  Franklin D. Roosevelt
Dwight D. Eisenhower  
  Henry A. Wallace
Alben W. Barkley  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
Political offices
Preceded byElihu Hayes
 Presiding Judge of Jackson County 1927 1935
Succeeded byEugene Purcell
Preceded byHenry A. Wallace
 Vice President of the United States 1945
Succeeded byAlben W. Barkley
Preceded byFranklin D. Roosevelt
 President of the United States 1945 1953
Succeeded byDwight D. Eisenhower
Party political offices
Preceded byCharles Hay
 Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Missouri(Class 1) 1934, 1940
Succeeded byFrank P. Briggs
Preceded byHenry A. Wallace
 Democratic nominee for Vice President of the United States 1944
Succeeded byAlben W. Barkley
Preceded byFranklin D. Roosevelt
 Democratic nominee for President of the United States 1948
Succeeded byAdlai Stevenson II
U.S. Senate
Preceded byRoscoe C. Patterson
 United States Senator (Class 1) from Missouri 1935 1945        Served alongside: Bennett Champ Clark, Forrest C. Donnell
Succeeded byFrank P. Briggs
Articles related to Harry S. Truman
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteVice presidents of the United States
John Adams (1789 1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797 1801)
Aaron Burr (1801 1805)
George Clinton (1805 1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813 1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817 1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825 1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833 1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837 1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845 1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849 1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857 1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869 1873)
Henry Wilson (1873 1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877 1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889 1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893 1897)
Garret Hobart (1897 1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905 1909)
James S. Sherman (1909 1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913 1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921 1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925 1929)
Charles Curtis (1929 1933)
John N. Garner (1933 1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949 1953)
Richard Nixon (1953 1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961 1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965 1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969 1973)
Gerald Ford (1973 1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974 1977)
Walter Mondale (1977 1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981 1989)
Dan Quayle (1989 1993)
Al Gore (1993 2001)
Dick Cheney (2001 2009)
Joe Biden (2009 2017)
Mike Pence (2017 2021)
Kamala Harris (2021 present)
 Category
 Commons
 List
vteDemocratic Party
History
Second Party System
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Nationalconventionsandpresidentialtickets
1828 (None): Jackson/Calhoun
1832 (Baltimore): Jackson/Van Buren
1835 (Baltimore): Van Buren/R. Johnson
1840 (Baltimore): Van Buren/None
1844 (Baltimore): Polk/Dallas
1848 (Baltimore): Cass/Butler
1852 (Baltimore): Pierce/King
1856 (Cincinnati): Buchanan/Breckinridge
1860 (Charleston/Baltimore): Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
1864 (Chicago): McClellan/Pendleton
1868 (New York): Seymour/Blair
1872 (Baltimore): Greeley/Brown
1876 (Saint Louis): Tilden/Hendricks
1880 (Cincinnati): Hancock/English
1884 (Chicago): Cleveland/Hendricks
1888 (Saint Louis): Cleveland/Thurman
1892 (Chicago): Cleveland/Stevenson I
1896 (Chicago): W. Bryan/Sewall
1900 (Kansas City): W. Bryan/Stevenson I
1904 (Saint Louis): Parker/H. Davis
1908 (Denver): W. Bryan/Kern
1912 (Baltimore): Wilson/Marshall
1916 (Saint Louis): Wilson/Marshall
1920 (San Francisco): Cox/Roosevelt
1924 (New York): J. Davis/C. Bryan
1928 (Houston): Smith/Robinson
1932 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Garner
1936 (Philadelphia): Roosevelt/Garner
1940 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Wallace
1944 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Truman
1948 (Philadelphia): Truman/Barkley
1952 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Sparkman
1956 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Kefauver
1960 (Los Angeles): Kennedy/L. Johnson
1964 (Atlantic City): L. Johnson/Humphrey
1968 (Chicago): Humphrey/Muskie
1972 (Miami Beach): McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
1976 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1980 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1984 (San Francisco): Mondale/Ferraro
1988 (Atlanta): Dukakis/Bentsen
1992 (New York): B. Clinton/Gore
1996 (Chicago): B. Clinton/Gore
2000 (Los Angeles): Gore/Lieberman
2004 (Boston): Kerry/Edwards
2008 (Denver): Obama/Biden
2012 (Charlotte): Obama/Biden
2016 (Philadelphia): H. Clinton/Kaine
2020 (Milwaukee/other locations): Biden/Harris
2024 (Chicago)
Presidentialadministrations
Jackson (1829 1837)
Van Buren (1837 1841)
Polk (1845 1849)
Pierce (1853 1857)
Buchanan (1857 1861)
A. Johnson (1868 1869)
Cleveland (1885 1889; 1893 1897)
Wilson (1913 1921)
Roosevelt (1933 1941; 1941 1945)
Truman (1945 1953)
Kennedy (1961 1963)
L. B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Carter (1977 1981)
Clinton (1993 2001)
Obama (2009 2017)
Biden (2021 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andCaucuschairs
A. Stevenson (1827 1834)
Bell (1834 1835)
Polk (1835 1839)
J. W. Jones (1843 1845)
Davis (1845 1847)
Cobb (1849 1851)
Boyd (1851 1855)
G. W. Jones (1855 1857)
Orr (1857 1859)
Houston (1859 1861)
Niblack/Randall (1869 1871)
Niblack (1873 1875)
Kerr (1875 1876)
Randall (1876 1881)
Carlisle (1883 1889)
Holman (1889 1891)
Crisp (1891 1895)
D. B. Culberson (1895 1897)
Richardson (1897 1903)
Williams (1903 1909)
Clark (1909 1921)
Kitchin (1921 1923)
Garrett (1923 1929)
Garner (1929 1933)
Rainey (1933 1934)
Byrns (1935 1936)
Bankhead (1936 1940)
Rayburn (1940 1961)
McCormack (1962 1971)
Albert (1971 1977)
O'Neill (1977 1987)
Wright (1987 1989)
Foley (1989 1995)
Gephardt (1995 2003)
Pelosi (2003 2023)
Jeffries (2023 )
U.S. SenateleadersandCaucuschairs
J. W. Stevenson (1873 1877)
Wallace (1877 1881)
Pendleton (1881 1885)
Beck (1885 1890)
Gorman (1890 1898)
Turpie (1898 1899)
J. K. Jones (1899 1903)
Gorman (1903 1906)
Blackburn (1906 1907)
C. A. Culberson (1907 1909)
Money (1909 1911)
Martin (1911 1913)
Kern (1913 1917)
Martin (1917 1919)
Hitchcock (1919 1920)
Underwood (1920 1923)
Robinson (1923 1937)
Barkley (1937 1949)
Lucas (1949 1951)
McFarland (1951 1953)
Johnson (1953 1961)
Mansfield (1961 1977)
Byrd (1977 1989)
Mitchell (1989 1995)
Daschle (1995 2005)
Reid (2005 2017)
Schumer (2017 )
Chairs ofthe DNC
Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez
Harrison
State andterritorialparties
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Democrats Abroad
AffiliatedgroupsCongress
Senate Caucus
Policy Committee
Steering and Outreach Committee
United States Senate Democratic Conference Secretary
House Caucus
Fundraising
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors
National Democratic Redistricting Committee
Sectional
College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Stonewall Young Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America
Related
Primaries
Presidential candidates
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
2006 House Caucus leadership election
2018 House Caucus leadership election
2022 House Caucus leadership election
Weekly Democratic Address
vteUnited States senators from MissouriClass 1
Benton
Geyer
Polk
Henderson
Schurz
Cockrell
Warner
Reed
Patterson
Truman
Briggs
Kem
Symington
Danforth
Ashcroft
Carnahan
Talent
McCaskill
Hawley
Class 3
Barton
Buckner
Linn
Atchison
Green
Johnson
Wilson
Brown
Drake
Jewett
Blair
Bogy
Armstrong
Shields
Vest
Stone
Wilfley
Spencer
Williams
Hawes
Clark
Donnell
Hennings
Long
Eagleton
Bond
Blunt
Schmitt
vteCold War
USA
USSR
NATO
Warsaw Pact
ANZUS
SEATO
METO
Rio Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
1940s
Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Jamaican political conflict
Dekemvriana
Soviet stance in the Warsaw Uprising
Percentages agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states
Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Downfall
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Indonesian National Revolution
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
1947 Polish legislative election
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 crises
Partition of India
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 1948
1947 1949 Palestine war
1947 1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab Israeli War
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
Marshall Plan
Comecon
1948 Czechoslovak coup d' tat
Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council
Al-Wathbah uprising
Tito Stalin split
Berlin Blockade
Annexation of Hyderabad
Madiun Affair
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Malayan Emergency
March 1949 Syrian coup d' tat
Operation Valuable
1950s
Bamboo Curtain
McCarthyism
Korean War
Arab Cold War (1952 1979)
Egyptian revolution of 1952
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Mau Mau rebellion
East German uprising of 1953
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Pact of Madrid
Bricker Amendment
1954 Syrian coup d' tat
Petrov Affair
Domino theory
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d' tat
Capture of the Tuapse
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Jebel Akhdar War
Algerian War
Kashmir Princess
Bandung Conference
Geneva Summit (1955)
Vietnam War
Cyprus Emergency
"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"
1956 Pozna  protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Polish October
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Sputnik crisis
Ifni War
Iraqi 14 July Revolution
1958 Lebanon crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
Laotian Civil War
Kitchen Debate
Cuban Revolution
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
1960s
Congo Crisis
Simba rebellion
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d' tat
Albanian Soviet split
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Annexation of Goa
Papua conflict
Indonesia Malaysia confrontation
Sand War
Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence
Cuban Missile Crisis
El Porte azo
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Ramadan Revolution
Eritrean War of Independence
North Yemen Civil War
1963 Syrian coup d' tat
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Aden Emergency
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Shifta War
Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre
Guatemalan Civil War
Colombian conflict
1964 Brazilian coup d' tat
Dominican Civil War
Rhodesian Bush War
Indonesian mass killings of 1965 1966
Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)
ASEAN Declaration
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
Cultural Revolution
Argentine Revolution
South African Border War
Korean DMZ Conflict
12-3 incident
Greek junta
1967 Hong Kong riots
Years of Lead (Italy)
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Al-Wadiah War
Nigerian Civil War
Protests of 1968
May 68
Prague Spring
USS Pueblo incident
1968 Polish political crisis
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
17 July Revolution
1968 Peruvian coup d' tat
Revolutionary Government
1969 Sudanese coup d' tat
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
1970s
D tente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September
Alcora Exercise
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Western Sahara conflict
Cambodian Civil War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1970 Polish protests
Koza riot
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 JVP insurrection
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1971 Sudanese coup d' tat
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972
Yemenite War of 1972
Munich massacre
1972 1975 Bangladesh insurgency
Eritrean Civil Wars
1973 Uruguayan coup d' tat
1973 Afghan coup d' tat
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
1973 oil crisis
Carnation Revolution
Spanish transition to democracy
Metapolitefsi
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Angolan Civil War
Cambodian genocide
June 1976 protests
Mozambican Civil War
Oromo conflict
Ogaden War
1978 Somali coup d' tat attempt
Western Sahara War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Third Indochina War
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Operation Condor
Dirty War (Argentina)
1976 Argentine coup d' tat
Egyptian Libyan War
German Autumn
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Nicaraguan Revolution
Uganda Tanzania War
NDF Rebellion
Chadian Libyan War
Yemenite War of 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
Sino-Vietnamese War
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
1980s
Salvadoran Civil War
Soviet Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
Gera Demands
Peruvian Revolution
Gda sk Agreement
Solidarity
Eritrean Civil Wars
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Ugandan Bush War
Gulf of Sidra incident
Martial law in Poland
Casamance conflict
Falklands War
1982 Ethiopian Somali Border War
Ndogboyosoi War
United States invasion of Grenada
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
1985 Geneva Summit
Iran Iraq War
Somali Rebellion
Reykjav k Summit
1986 Black Sea incident
South Yemen Civil War
Toyota War
1987 Lieyu massacre
Operation INFEKTION
1987 1989 JVP insurrection
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
8888 Uprising
Solidarity (Soviet reaction)
Contras
Central American crisis
Operation RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Bougainville conflict
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
Afghan Civil War
United States invasion of Panama
1988 Polish strikes
Polish Round Table Agreement
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Peaceful Revolution
1990s
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Gulf War
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup
Frozen conflicts
Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Kinmen Agreement
IdeologiesCapitalism
Liberalism
Chicago school
Keynesianism
Libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Democratic capitalism
Socialism
Communism
Marxism Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Maoism
Trotskyism
Stalinism
Titoism
Other
Imperialism
Anti-imperialism
Nationalism
Ultranationalism
Chauvinism
Ethnic nationalism
Racism
Zionism
Anti-Zionism
Fascism
Neo-Nazism
Islamism
Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Guided democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy
White nationalism
White separatism
Apartheid
Organizations
NATO
SEATO
METO
EEC
Warsaw Pact
Comecon
Non-Aligned Movement
NN States
ASEAN
SAARC
Safari Club
PropagandaPro-communist
Active measures
Izvestia
Neues Deutschland
Pravda
Rud  pr vo
Trybuna Ludu
TASS
Soviet Life
Pro-Western
Amerika
Crusade for Freedom
Paix et Libert 
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Radio Free Asia
Red Scare
Voice of America
Technologicalcompetition
Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Historians
Gar Alperovitz
Thomas A. Bailey
Michael Beschloss
Archie Brown
Warren H. Carroll
Adrian Cioroianu
John Costello
Michael Cox
Nicholas J. Cull
Norman Davies
Willem Drees
Robert D. English
Herbert Feis
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Andr  Fontaine
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
John Lewis Gaddis
Lloyd Gardner
Timothy Garton Ash
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Fred Halliday
Jussi Hanhim ki
John Earl Haynes
Patrick J. Hearden
Tvrtko Jakovina
Tony Judt
Harvey Klehr
Gabriel Kolko
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Melvyn P. Leffler
Geir Lundestad
Vojtech Mastny
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Thomas J. McCormick
Timothy Naftali
Marius Oprea
David S. Painter
William B. Pickett
Ronald E. Powaski
Yakov M. Rabkin
Mary Elise Sarotte
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Ellen Schrecker
Giles Scott-Smith
Shen Zhihua
Timothy D. Snyder
Athan Theoharis
Andrew Thorpe
Vladimir Tism neanu
Patrick Vaughan
Alex von Tunzelmann
Odd Arne Westad
William Appleman Williams
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Rudolph Winnacker
Ken Young
Espionage andintelligence
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
Soviet espionage in the United States
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CIA
MI5
MI6
United States involvement in regime change
Soviet involvement in regime change
MVD
KGB
Stasi
See also
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet Union United States relations
Soviet Union United States summits
Russia NATO relations
War on terror
Brinkmanship
Second Cold War
Russian Revolution
Category
List of conflicts
Timeline
vteTime Persons of the Year1927 1950
Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)
1951 1975
Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II  (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segr  / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward  (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
 The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell  (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
 American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt  (1975)
1976 2000
Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wa sa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin  (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeff Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)
2001 present
Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins  (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
 The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates  (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
 Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah  (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)
 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital  (2018)
Greta Thunberg (2019)
Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020)
Elon Musk (2021)
Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022)
vte(  1940)   1944 United States presidential election   (  1948)Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Franklin D. Roosevelt (incumbent)
Vice President: Harry Truman
Other candidates
Harry F. Byrd
James Farley
Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Thomas E. Dewey
Vice President: John W. Bricker
Other candidates
Riley A. Bender
Everett Dirksen
Douglas MacArthur
Harold Stassen
Robert A. Taft
Wendell Willkie
Third party and independent candidatesAmerica First Party
Nominee: Gerald L. K. Smith
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Claude A. Watson
Socialist Party
Nominee: Norman Thomas
VP nominee: Darlington Hoopes
Other 1944 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1944)   1948 United States presidential election   (  1952)Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Incumbent nominee: Harry S. Truman
campaign
VP nominee: Alben W. Barkley
Other candidates: Harley M. Kilgore
Richard Russell Jr.
Henry A. Wallace
Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Thomas E. Dewey
VP nominee: Earl Warren
Other candidates: Riley A. Bender
Herbert E. Hitchcock
Douglas MacArthur
Joseph W. Martin Jr.
Edward Martin
Leverett Saltonstall
Harold Stassen
Arthur Vandenberg
Robert A. Taft
States' Rights Democratic Party
Convention
Candidates
Nominee: Strom Thurmond
VP nominee: Fielding L. Wright
Other third party and independent candidatesProhibition Party
Nominee: Claude A. Watson
VP nominee: Dale H. Learn
Progressive Party
Nominee: Henry A. Wallace
Nominee: Glen H. Taylor
Socialist Party
Nominee: Norman Thomas
VP nominee: Tucker P. Smith
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee: Grace Carlson
Independents and other candidates
Gerald L. K. Smith
Other 1948 elections: House
Senate
vteCabinet of President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)Vice President
John Nance Garner (1933 1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Secretary of State
Cordell Hull (1933 1944)
Edward Stettinius Jr. (1944 1945)
Secretary of the Treasury
William H. Woodin (1933)
Henry Morgenthau Jr. (1934 1945)
Secretary of War
George Dern (1933 1936)
Harry Hines Woodring (1936 1940)
Henry L. Stimson (1940 1945)
Attorney General
Homer Stille Cummings (1933 1939)
Frank Murphy (1939 1940)
Robert H. Jackson (1940 1941)
Francis Biddle (1941 1945)
Postmaster General
James Farley (1933 1940)
Frank C. Walker (1940 1945)
Secretary of the Navy
Claude A. Swanson (1933 1939)
Charles Edison (1939 1940)
Frank Knox (1940 1944)
James Forrestal (1944 1945)
Secretary of the Interior
Harold L. Ickes (1933 1945)
Secretary of Agriculture
Henry A. Wallace (1933 1940)
Claude R. Wickard (1940 1945)
Secretary of Commerce
Daniel C. Roper (1933 1938)
Harry Hopkins (1938 1940)
Jesse H. Jones (1940 1945)
Henry A. Wallace (1945)
Secretary of Labor
Frances Perkins (1933 1945)
vteCabinet of President Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)Vice President
None (1945 1949)
Alben W. Barkley (1949 1953)
Secretary of State
Edward Stettinius Jr. (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1945 1947)
George C. Marshall (1947 1949)
Dean Acheson (1949 1953)
Secretary of the Treasury
Henry Morgenthau Jr. (1945)
Fred M. Vinson (1945 1946)
John Wesley Snyder (1946 1953)
Secretary of War
Henry L. Stimson (1945)
Robert P. Patterson (1945 1947)
Kenneth Claiborne Royall (1947)
Secretary of Defense
James Forrestal (1947 1949)
Louis A. Johnson (1949 1950)
George C. Marshall (1950 1951)
Robert A. Lovett (1951 1953)
Attorney General
Francis Biddle (1945)
Tom C. Clark (1945 1949)
J. Howard McGrath (1949 1952)
James P. McGranery (1952 1953)
Postmaster General
Frank C. Walker (1945)
Robert E. Hannegan (1945 1947)
Jesse M. Donaldson (1947 1953)
Secretary of the Navy
James Forrestal (1945 1947)
Secretary of the Interior
Harold L. Ickes (1945 1946)
Julius Albert Krug (1946 1949)
Oscar L. Chapman (1949 1953)
Secretary of Agriculture
Claude R. Wickard (1945)
Clinton Anderson (1945 1948)
Charles F. Brannan (1948 1953)
Secretary of Commerce
Henry A. Wallace (1945 1946)
W. Averell Harriman (1946 1948)
Charles W. Sawyer (1948 1953)
Secretary of Labor
Frances Perkins (1945)
Lewis B. Schwellenbach (1945 1948)
Maurice J. Tobin (1948 1953)
Portals: Biography Politics United States World War I World War II
vteMissouri's delegation(s) to the 74th 79th United States Congress (ordered by seniority)
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harry_S._Truman&oldid=1149623714"