Part of a series onAncient Greek religion
Origins
Ancient Greek religion
Mycenaean Greece, Mycenaean religion and Mycenaean deities
Minoan Civilization, Minoan religion
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece, Hellenistic religion
Sacred PlacesSacred Islands
Delos
Ithaca
Naxos
Kythira
Samothrace
Crete
Lemnos
Sacred Mountains
Mount Lykaion
Mount Ida (Turkey)
Mount Ida (Crete)
Mount Olympus
Mount Kyllini
Mount Othrys
Sanctuaries
Aornum
Delphi
Didyma
Dion
Dodona
Eleusis
Olympia
Other
Cave of Zeus
Troy
Deities
Primordial deities
Achlys
Aether
Aion
Ananke
Chaos
Chronos
Erebus
Eros
Fates
Atropos
Clotho
Lachesis
Gaia
Hemera
Nyx
Ourea
Phanes
Pontus
Thalassa
Tartarus
Uranus
Olympians
Aphrodite
Apollo
Ares
Artemis
Athena
Demeter
Dionysus
Hephaestus
Hera
Hermes
Hestia
Poseidon
Zeus
Chthonic deities
Hades
Persephone
Angelos
Demeter
Erinyes
Gaia
Hecate
Iacchus
Melino 
Triptolemus
Trophonius
Lesser deities
Alpheus
Amphitrite
Asclepius
Bia
Circe
Cybele
Deimos
Eileithyia
Enyo
Eos
Eris
Harmonia
Hebe
Hecate
Helios
Heracles
Iris
Kratos
Leto
Maia
Metis
Momus
Nemesis
Nereus
Nike
Pan
Persephone
Phobos
Priapus
Proteus
Rhea
Scamander
Selene
Thanatos
Themis
Thetis
Triton
Zelus
ConceptsWorldview
Greek mythology
Orphic Egg
Underworld and Afterlife
Miasma
Daimon
Greek Heroic Age
Divine and Reality
Apeiron
Monism
Polytheism
Pantheism
Form of the Good
Theory of forms
Mind
Anamnesis
Ataraxia
Apatheia
Episteme
Epoch 
Katalepsis
Logos
Nous
Phronesis
Soul
Anima mundi
Metempsychosis
Henosis
Plato's theory of soul
Ethics
Arete
Hubris
Xenia
Ethic of Reciprocity
Delphic maxims
Adiaphora
Eudaimonia
Kathekon
Oikei sis
Mysteries
Eleusinian Mysteries
Orphism
Dionysian Mysteries
PracticesWorship
Agalma
Dithyramb
Paean
Orgion
Hiera Orgas
Hero Cult
Oracle and Pythia
Sacrifices and Offerings
Holokaustos
Libation
Votive offering
Animal Sacrifice
Temples and holy sites
Temple
Temenos
Meditation and Charity
Eusebeia
Meditation
Euergetism
Rites of passage
Amphidromia
Marriage
Funeral Rites
Festivals
Thesmophoria
Dionysia
Daphnephoria
Anthesteria
Arrephoria
Kronia
Genesia
Elaphebolia
Pyanopsia
Khalkeia
Haloa
Halieia
Thargelia
Three Monthly Festivals
Deipnon
Noumenia
Agathodaemon
Religious Games
Panathenaia
Herakleia
Panhellenic Games
Olympic Games
Nemean Games
Pythian Games
Isthmian Games
Philosophy
Pythagoreanism
Neopythagoreanism
Platonism
Middle Platonism
Neoplatonism
Philosophers
Ancient
Hesiod
Homer
Pherecydes of Syros
Pythagoras
Xenophanes
Parmenides
Empedocles
Socrates
Plato
Aratus
Plutarch
Plotinus
Iamblichus
Julian (emperor)
Texts
Argonautica
Bibliotheca
Corpus Hermeticum
Delphic maxims
Derveni papyrus
Dionysiaca
Epic Cycle
Homeric Hymns
Iliad
Odyssey
Orphic Hymns
Theogony
Works and Days
Other Topics
Pilgrimage Sites
Calendar
Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism
Julian restoration
Modern Restoration
 Religion portal   Ancient Greece portalvte
The following is a list of gods, goddesses, and many other divine and semi-divine figures from ancient Greek mythology and ancient Greek religion.
Immortals
The Greeks created images of their deities for many purposes. A temple would house the statue of a god or goddess, or multiple deities, and might be decorated with relief scenes depicting myths. Divine images were common on coins. Drinking cups and other vessels were painted with scenes from Greek myths.
Major gods and goddesses
Deity
Description
Aphrodite ( , Aphrodit )
Goddess of beauty, love, desire, and pleasure. In Hesiod's Theogony (188 206), she was born from sea-foam and the severed genitals of Uranus; in Homer's Iliad (5.370 417), she is daughter of Zeus and Dione. She was married to Hephaestus, but bore him no children. She had many lovers, most notably Ares, to whom she bore Harmonia, Phobos, and Deimos. She was also a lover to Adonis and Anchises, to whom she bore Aeneas. She is usually depicted as a naked or semi-nude beautiful woman. Her symbols include the magical girdle, myrtle, roses, and the scallop shell. Her sacred animals include doves and sparrows. Her Roman counterpart is Venus.[1]
Apollo ( , Ap ll n)
God of music, arts, knowledge, healing, plague, prophecy, poetry, manly beauty, and archery. He is the son of Zeus and Leto, and the twin brother of Artemis. Both Apollo and Artemis use a bow and arrow. Apollo is depicted as young, beardless, handsome and athletic. In myth, he can be cruel and destructive, and his love affairs are rarely happy. He is often accompanied by the Muses. His most famous temple is in Delphi, where he established his oracular shrine. His signs and symbols include the laurel wreath, bow and arrow, and lyre. His sacred animals include roe deer, swans, and pythons. Some late Roman and Greek poetry and mythography identifies him as a sun-god, equivalent to Roman Sol and Greek Helios.[2]
Ares ( ,  r s)
God of courage, war, bloodshed, and violence. The son of Zeus and Hera, he was depicted as a beardless youth, either nude with a helmet and spear or sword, or as an armed warrior. Homer portrays him as moody and unreliable, and as being the most unpopular god on earth and Olympus (Iliad 5.890 1). He generally represents the chaos of war in contrast to Athena, a goddess of military strategy and skill. Ares is known for cuckolding his brother Hephaestus, conducting an affair with his wife Aphrodite. His sacred animals include vultures, venomous snakes, dogs, and boars. His Roman counterpart Mars by contrast was regarded as the dignified ancestor of the Roman people.[3]
Artemis ( ,  rtemis)
Virgin goddess of the hunt, wilderness, animals, the Moon and young girls. Both she and Apollo are archery gods. She is the daughter of Zeus and Leto, and twin sister of Apollo. In art she is often depicted as a young woman dressed in a short knee-length chiton and equipped with a silver hunting bow and a quiver of arrows. Her attributes include hunting knives and spears, animal pelts, deer and other wild animals. Her sacred animal is a deer. Her Roman counterpart is Diana.[4]
Athena ( , Ath n )
Goddess of reason, wisdom, intelligence, skill, peace, warfare, battle strategy, and handicrafts. According to most traditions, she was born from Zeus's forehead, fully formed and armored, after Zeus swallowed her mother, Metis, whole. She is depicted as being crowned with a crested helm, armed with shield and spear, and wearing the aegis over a long dress. Poets describe her as "grey-eyed" or having especially bright, keen eyes. She is a special patron of heroes such as Odysseus. She is the patron of the city Athens (from which she takes her name) and is attributed to various inventions in arts and literature. Her symbol is the olive tree. She is commonly shown as being accompanied by her sacred animal, the owl. Her Roman counterpart is Minerva.[5]
Demeter ( , D m t r)
Goddess of grain, agriculture, harvest, growth, and nourishment. Demeter, whose Roman counterpart is Ceres, is a daughter of Cronus and Rhea, and was swallowed and then regurgitated by her father. She is a sister of Zeus, by whom she bore Persephone, who is also known as Kore, i.e. "the girl." One of the central myths associated with Demeter involves Hades' abduction of Persephone and Demeter's lengthy search for her. Demeter is one of the main deities of the Eleusinian Mysteries, in which the rites seemed to center around Demeter's search for and reunion with her daughter, which symbolized both the rebirth of crops in spring and the rebirth of the initiates after death. She is depicted as a mature woman, often crowned and holding sheafs of wheat and a torch.[6] Her symbols are the cornucopia, wheat-ears, the winged serpent, and the lotus staff. Her sacred animals include pigs and snakes.
Dionysus ( , Di nusos)/Bacchus ( , B kkhos)
God of wine, fruitfulness, parties, festivals, madness, chaos, drunkenness, vegetation, ecstasy, and the theater. He is the twice-born son of Zeus and Semele, in that Zeus snatched him from his mother's womb and stitched Dionysus into his own thigh and carried him until he was ready to be born. In art he is depicted as either an older bearded god (particularly before 430 BC) or an effeminate, long-haired youth (particularly after 430 BC). His attributes include the thyrsus, a drinking cup, the grape vine, and a crown of ivy. He is often in the company of his thiasos, a group of attendants including satyrs, maenads, and his old tutor Silenus. The consort of Dionysus was Ariadne. It was once held that Dionysius was a later addition to the Greek pantheon, but the discovery of Linear B tablets confirm his status as a deity from an early period. Bacchus was another name for him in Greek, and came into common usage among the Romans.[7] His sacred animals include dolphins, serpents, tigers, and donkeys.
Hades ( , H id s)/Pluto ( , Plout n)
King of the underworld and the dead. He is also a god of wealth. His consort is Persephone. His attributes are the drinking horn or cornucopia, key, sceptre, and the three-headed dog Cerberus. His sacred animals include the screech owl. He was one of three sons of Cronus and Rhea, and thus sovereign over one of the three realms of the universe, the underworld. As a chthonic god, however, his place among the Olympians is ambiguous. In the mystery religions and Athenian literature, Plouton ("the Rich one") was his preferred name, because of the idea that all riches came from the earth. The term Hades was used in this literature to refer to the underworld itself. The Romans translated Plouton as Dis Pater ("the Rich Father") or Pluto.[8]
Hephaestus ( , H phaistos)
God of fire, metalworking, and crafts. Either the son of Zeus and Hera or Hera alone, he is the smith of the gods and the husband of the adulterous Aphrodite. He was usually depicted as a bearded, crippled man with hammer, tongs, and anvil, and sometimes riding a donkey. His sacred animals include the donkey, the guard dog, and the crane. Among his creations was the armor of Achilles. Hephaestus used the fire of the forge as a creative force, but his Roman counterpart Vulcan was feared for his destructive potential and associated with the volcanic power of the earth.
Hera ( , H ra)
Queen of the gods, and goddess of women, marriage, childbirth, heirs, kings, and empires. She is the goddess of the sky, the wife and sister of Zeus, and the daughter of Cronus and Rhea. She was usually depicted as a regal woman in the prime of her life, wearing a diadem and veil and holding a lotus-tipped staff. Although she is the goddess of marriage, Zeus's many infidelities drive her to jealousy and vengefulness. Her sacred animals include the heifer, the peacock, and the cuckoo. Her Roman counterpart is Juno.
Hermes ( , H rm s)
God of boundaries, travel, trade, communication, language, writing, cunning and thieves. Hermes was also responsible for protecting livestock and presided over the spheres associated with fertility, music, luck, and deception.[9] The son of Zeus and Maia, Hermes is the messenger of the gods, and a psychopomp who leads the souls of the dead into the afterlife. He was depicted either as a handsome and athletic beardless youth, or as an older bearded man. His attributes include the herald's wand or caduceus, winged sandals, and a traveler's cap. His sacred animals include the tortoise. His Roman counterpart is Mercury.
Hestia ( , Hest a)
Virgin goddess of the hearth, home, domesticity and chastity. She is a daughter of Rhea and Cronus, and a sister of Zeus. Not often identifiable in Greek art, she appeared as a modestly veiled woman. Her symbols are the hearth and kettle. She plays little role in Greek myths, and although she is omitted in some lists of the twelve Olympians in favour of Dionysus, no ancient tale tells of her abdicating or giving her seat to Dionysus.[10] Her Roman counterpart Vesta, however, was a major deity of the Roman state.
Persephone ( , Perseph n )
Queen of the Underworld, wife of Hades and daughter of Demeter and Zeus. Her symbols include the pomegranate, grain, torches, wheat and the asphodelus. After her abduction by Hades, she was forced to split the year between the world of the dead with her husband and the world of the living with her mother. She was worshipped in conjunction with Demeter, especially in the Eleusinian Mysteries. In ancient art she is usually depicted as a young woman, usually in the scene of her abduction.
Poseidon ( , Poseid n)
God of the sea, rivers, floods, droughts, and earthquakes. He is a son of Cronus and Rhea, and the brother of Zeus and Hades. He rules one of the three realms of the universe, as king of the sea and the waters. In art he is depicted as a mature man of sturdy build, often with a luxuriant beard, and holding a trident. His sacred animals include the horse and the dolphin. His wedding with Amphitrite is often presented as a triumphal procession. In some stories he rapes Medusa, leading to her transformation into a hideous Gorgon and also to the birth of their two children, Pegasus and Chrysaor. His Roman counterpart is Neptune.
 Zeus ( , Ze s)
King of the gods, ruler of Mount Olympus, and god of the sky, weather, thunder, lightning, law, order, and justice. He is the youngest son of Cronus and Rhea. He overthrew Cronus and gained the sovereignty of heaven for himself. In art he is depicted as a regal, mature man with a sturdy figure and dark beard. His usual attributes are the royal scepter and the lightning bolt. His sacred animals include the eagle and the bull. His Roman counterpart is Jupiter, also known as Jove.
Greek primordial deities
List of Greek primordial deities (Protogenoi)
Ancient Greek name
English name
Description
  (Akhl s)
Achlys
The goddess of poisons, and the personification of misery and sadness. Said to have existed before Chaos itself.
  (Aith r)
Aether
The god of light and the upper atmosphere.
  (Ai n)
Aion
The god of eternity, personifying cyclical and unbounded time. Sometimes equated with Chronos.
  (An nk )
Ananke
The goddess of inevitability, compulsion, and necessity.
  (Kh os)
Chaos
The personification of nothingness from which all of existence sprang. Depicted as a void. Initially genderless, later on described as female.
  (Khr nos)
Chronos
The god of empirical time, sometimes equated with Aion. Not to be confused with the Titan Cronus (Kronos), the father of Zeus.
  ( rebos)
Erebus
The god of darkness and shadow, as well as the void that existed between Earth and the Underworld.
  ( r s)
Eros
The god of love and attraction.
  (Ga a)
Gaia (Gaea)
Personification of the Earth (Mother Earth); mother of the Titans.
  (H m ra)
Hemera
The goddess of day.
  (H pnos)
Hypnos
The personification of sleep.
  (N mesis)
Nemesis
The goddess of retribution.
  (N soi)
The Nesoi
The goddesses of islands.
  (N x)
Nyx
The goddess of night.
  (O rea)
The Ourea
The gods of mountains.
  (Ph n s)
Phanes
The god of procreation in the Orphic tradition.
  (P ntos)
Pontus
The god of the sea, father of the fish and other sea creatures.
  (T rtaros)
Tartarus
The god of the deepest, darkest part of the underworld, the Tartarean pit (which is also referred to as Tartarus itself).
  (Th lassa)
Thalassa
Personification of the sea and consort of Pontus.
  (Th natos)
Thanatos
Personification of peaceful, nonviolent death. Brother to Hypnos (Sleep) and Moros (Doom).
  (Ouran s)
Uranus
The god of the heavens (Father Sky); father of the Titans.
Titans and Titanesses
The Titan gods and goddesses are depicted in Greek art less commonly than the Olympians.
Eos (Dawn) and the hero Memnon (490 480 BC)
Helios in his four-horse chariot (3rd century BC)
Themis, from the Temple of Nemesis (ca. 300 BC)
Oceanus wearing crab-claw horns, with Tethys (Roman-era mosaic)
Athena watches Prometheus create humans (3rd century AD)
Titans and titanesses
Greek name
English name
Description
The Twelve Titans
  (Ko os)
Coeus
God of intellect and the axis of heaven around which the constellations revolved.
  (Kre os)
Crius
The least individualized of the Twelve Titans, he is the father of Astraeus, Pallas, and Perses. Implied to be the god of constellations.
  (Kr nos)
Cronus
God of harvests and personification of destructive time. The leader of the Titans, who overthrew his father Uranus only to be overthrown in turn by his son, Zeus. Not to be confused with Chronos.
  (Hyper n)
Hyperion
God of light. With Theia, he is the father of Helios (the Sun), Selene (the Moon), and Eos (the Dawn).
  (Iapet s)
Iapetus
God of mortality and father of Prometheus, Epimetheus, Menoetius, and Atlas.
M  (Mn mos n )
Mnemosyne
Goddess of memory and remembrance, and mother of the Nine Muses.
  ( cean s)
Oceanus
God of the all-encircling river Oceans around the earth, the fount of all the Earth's fresh-water.
  (Pho b )
Phoebe
Goddess of the "bright" intellect and prophecy, and consort of Coeus.
  (Rh a)
Rhea
Goddess of fertility, motherhood and the mountain wilds. She is the sister and consort of Cronus, and mother of Zeus, Hades, Poseidon, Hera, Demeter, and Hestia.
  (T th s)
Tethys
Goddess of fresh-water, and the mother of the rivers, springs, streams, fountains, and clouds.
  (The a)
Theia
Goddess of sight and the shining light of the clear blue sky. She is the consort of Hyperion, and mother of Helios, Selene, and Eos.
  (Th mis)
Themis
Goddess of divine law and order.
Other Titans
  ( nytos)
Anytos
God who reared the young goddess Despoina, the daughter of Demeter.
  (Aster a)
Asteria
Goddess of nocturnal oracles and falling stars.
  (Astra os)
Astraeus
God of dusk, stars, and planets, and the art of astrology.
  ( tlas)
Atlas
God forced to carry the heavens upon his shoulders by Zeus. Presumed to be the god of endurance and astronomy. Also Son of Iapetus.
  (Di n )
Dione
Goddess of the oracle of Dodona.
  (H lios)
Helios
God of the Sun and guardian of oaths.
  ( s)
Eos
Goddess of the Dawn.
  (Epim the s)
Epimetheus
God of afterthought and the father of excuses.
  (L lantos)
Lelantos
God of moving unseen and The father of the nymph Aura by Periboea
  (L t )
Leto
Goddess of motherhood and mother of the twin Olympians, Artemis and Apollo.
  (Meno tios)
Menoetius
God of violent anger, rash action, and human mortality. Killed by Zeus.
  (M tis)
Metis
Goddess of good counsel, advice, planning, cunning, craftiness, and wisdom. Mother of Athena.
  (P llas)
Pallas
God of warcraft. He was killed by Athena during the Titanomachy.
  (P rs s)
Perses
God of destruction.
  (Prom the s)
Prometheus
God of forethought and crafty counsel, and creator of mankind.
  (Sel n )
Selene
Goddess of the Moon.
  (St x)
Styx
Goddess of the Underworld river Styx and personification of hatred.
  (Syke s)
Syceus
God whom Gaia turned into a fig tree to help him escape from Zeus.
  (Titan)
Titan
God of The calendar of the seasons brother of Helios, usually just Helios himself
Gigantes
See also: Giants (Greek mythology)  Named Giants
 Athena (left) fighting Enceladus (inscribed retrograde) on an Attic red-figure dish, c. 550 500 BC (Louvre CA3662).[11]
The Gigantes were the offspring of Gaia (Earth), born from the blood that fell when Uranus (Sky) was castrated by their Titan son Cronus, who fought the Gigantomachy, their war with the Olympian gods for supremacy of the cosmos, they include:
Alcyoneus ( ), a giant usually considered to be one of the Gigantes, slain by Heracles.
Chthonius ( ).
Damysus ( ), the fastest of all the Giants in Greek mythology.
Enceladus ( ), typically slain by Athena, said to be buried under Mount Etna in Sicily.
Mimas ( ), according to Apollodorus, he was killed by Hephaestus, or by others Zeus or Ares.
Pallas ( ), according to Apollodorus, he was flayed by Athena, who used his skin as a shield.
Picolous ( ), who fled the battle but was slain by Helios.
Polybotes ( ), typically slain by Poseidon.
Porphyrion ( ), one of the leaders of the Gigantes, typically slain by Zeus.
Thoas/Thoon ( ), he was killed by the Moirai.
Other "giants"
Aloadae ( ), twin giants who attempted to climb to Olympus by piling mountains on top of each other.
Otus or Otos ( ).
Ephialtes ( ).
Anax ( ) was a giant of the island of Lade near Miletos in Lydia, Anatolia.
Antaeus ( ), a Libyan giant who wrestled all visitors to the death until he was slain by Heracles.
Antiphates ( ), the king of the man-eating giants known as Laestrygones which were encountered by Odysseus on his travels.
Argus Panoptes (   ), a hundred-eyed giant tasked with guarding Io.
Asterius ( ), a Lydian giant.
Cacus ( ), a fire-breathing Latin giant slain by Heracles.
Cyclopes (Hesiodic), three one-eyed giants who forged the lightning bolts of Zeus, Trident of Poseidon, and Helmet of Hades.
Arges ( ).
Brontes ( ).
Steropes ( ).
Cyclopes (Homeric), a tribe of one-eyed, man-eating giants who herded flocks of sheep on the island of Sicily.
Polyphemus ( ), a Cyclops who briefly captured Odysseus and his men, only to be overcome and blinded by the hero.
The Gegenees ( ), a tribe of six-armed giants fought by the Argonauts on Bear Mountain in Mysia.
Geryon ( ), a three-bodied giant who dwelt on the sunset isle at the ends of the earth. He was slain by Heracles when the hero arrived to fetch the giant's cattle as one of his twelve labours.
The Hekatoncheires ( ), or Centimanes (Latin), the Hundred-Handed Ones, giant gods of violent storms and hurricanes. Three sons of Uranus and Gaia, each with his own distinct characters.[12]
Briareus ( ) or Aigaion ( ), The Vigorous.
Cottus ( ), The Furious.
Gyges ( ), The Big-Limbed.
The Laestrygonians ( ), a tribe of man-eating giants encountered by Odysseus on his travels.
Orion ( ), a giant huntsman whom Zeus placed among the stars as the constellation of Orion.
Talos ( ), a giant forged from bronze by Hephaestus, and given by Zeus to his lover Europa as her personal protector.
Tityos ( ), a giant slain by Apollo and Artemis when he attempted to violate their mother Leto.
Typhon ( ), a monstrous immortal storm-giant who attempted to launch an attack on Mount Olympus but was defeated by the Olympians and imprisoned in the pits of Tartarus.
Personified concepts
Achlys ( ), spirit of the death-mist, personification of sadness, misery and poison
Adephagia ( ), spirit of satiety and gluttony
Adikia ( ), spirit of injustice and wrongdoing
Aergia ( ), spirit of idleness, laziness, indolence and sloth
Agathodaemon ( ), spirit of the vineyards and grainfields; ensuring good luck, health, and wisdom
Agon ( ), spirit of contest, who possessed an altar at Olympia, site of the Olympic Games
Aidos ( ), spirit of modesty, reverence and respect
Aisa ( ), personification of lot and fate
Alala ( ), spirit of the war cry
Alastor ( ), spirit of blood feuds and vengeance
Aletheia ( ), spirit of truth, truthfulness and sincerity
The Algea ( ), spirits of pain and suffering
Achos ( ) "trouble, distress"
Ania ( ) "ache, anguish"
Lupe ( ) "pain, grief, sadness"
Alke ( ), spirit of prowess and courage (one of the Machai)
Amechania ( ), spirit of helplessness and want of means
The Amphilogiai ( ), spirits of disputes, debate, and contention
Anaideia ( ), spirit of ruthlessness, shamelessness, and unforgivingness
The Androktasiai ( ), spirits of battlefield slaughter
Angelia ( ), spirit of messages, tidings and proclamations
Apate ( ), spirit of deceit, guile, fraud and deception
Apheleia ( ), spirit of simplicity
The Arae ( ), spirits of curses
Arete ( ), spirit of virtue, excellence, goodness, and valour
At  ( ), spirit of delusion, infatuation, blind folly, recklessness, and ruin
Bia (  "Violence"), the personification of force and raw energy
Caerus ( ), spirit of opportunity
Corus ( ), spirit of surfeit
Deimos ( ), spirit of fear, dread, and terror
Dikaiosyne ( ), spirit of justice and righteousness
Dike ( ), spirit of justice, fair judgement, and the rights established by custom and law
Dolos ( ), spirit of trickery, cunning deception, craftiness, treachery, and guile
Dysnomia ( ), spirit of lawlessness and poor civil constitution
Dyssebeia ( ), spirit of impiety
Eirene ( ), goddess of peace
Eiresione ( ), personification of the olive branch
Ekecheiria ( ), spirit of truce, armistice, and the cessation of all hostilities; honoured at the Olympic Games
Eleos ( ), spirit of mercy, pity, and compassion
Eleutheria ( ) personification of, liberty
Elpis ( ), spirit of hope and expectation
Epiphron ( ), spirit of prudence, shrewdness, thoughtfulness, carefulness, and sagacity
Eris ( ), spirit of strife, discord, contention, and rivalry
The Erotes ( )
Anteros ( ), god of requited love
Eros ( ), god of love and sexual intercourse
Hedylogos ( ), god of sweet talk and flattery
Hermaphroditus ( ), god of unions, androgyny, marriage, sexuality and fertility
Himeros ( ), god of sexual desire
Hymen ( ) or Hymenaeus ( ), god of marriage ceremonies, inspiring feasts and song
Pothos ( ), god of sexual longing, yearning, and desire
Eucleia ( ), spirit of good repute and glory
Eulabeia ( ), spirit of discretion, caution, and circumspection
Eunomia ( ), goddess of good order and lawful conduct
Eupheme ( ), spirit of words of good omen, acclamation, praise, applause, and shouts of triumph
Eupraxia (E ), spirit of well-being
Eusebeia (E ), spirit of piety, loyalty, duty, and filial respect
Euthenia ( ), spirit of prosperity, abundance, and plenty
Gelos ( ), spirit of laughter
Geras ( ), spirit of old age
Harmonia ( ), goddess of harmony and concord
Hedone ( ), spirit of pleasure, enjoyment, and delight
Heimarmene ( ), personification of share destined by fate
Hesychia spirit of quiet
Homados ( ), spirit of the din of battle
Homonoia ( ), spirit of concord, unanimity, and oneness of mind
Horkos ( ), spirit of oaths
Horme ( ), spirit of impulse or effort (to do a thing), eagerness, setting oneself in motion, and starting an action
Hybris ( ), spirit of outrageous behaviour
Hypnos ( ), god of sleep
The Hysminai ( ), spirits of fighting and combat
Ioke ( ), spirit of pursuit in battle
Kakia (K ), spirit of vice and moral badness
The Keres ( ), spirit of violent or cruel death
Koalemos ( ), spirit of stupidity and foolishness
Kratos ( ), spirit of strength, might, power, and sovereign rule
Kydoimos ( ), spirit of the din of battle, confusion, uproar, and hubbub
Lethe ( ), spirit of forgetfulness and oblivion, and of the river of the same name
Limos ( ), spirit of hunger and starvation
The Litae ( ), spirits of prayer
Lyssa ( ), spirit of rage, fury and rabies in animals
The Machai ( ), spirits of fighting and combat
Mania ( ), spirit or spirits of madness, insanity, and frenzy
The Moirai, or "Fates" ( )
Clotho ( ), the spinner of the life thread
Lachesis ( ), the measurer of the life thread
Atropos ( ), the severer of the life thread
Momus ( ), spirit of mockery, blame, censure and stinging criticism
Moros ( ), spirit of doom
The Neikea (   ), spirits of quarrels, feuds and grievances
Nemesis ( ), goddess of revenge, balance, righteous indignation, and retribution
Nike ( ), goddess of victory
Nomos ( ), spirit of law
Oizys ( ), spirit of woe and misery
The Oneiroi ( ), Dreams
Palioxis ( ), spirit of backrush, flight and retreat from battle
Peitharchia ( ), spirit of discipline
Peitho ( ), spirit of persuasion and seduction
Penia ( ), spirit of poverty and need
Penthus ( ), spirit of grief, mourning, and lamentation
Pepromene ( ), personification of the destined share, similar to Heimarmene
Pheme ( ), spirit of rumour, report, and gossip
Philophrosyne ( ), spirit of friendliness, kindness, and welcome
Philotes ( ), spirit of friendship, affection, and sexual intercourse
Phobos ( ), spirit of panic fear, flight, and battlefield rout
The Phonoi ( ), spirits of murder, killing, and slaughter
Phrike ( ), spirit of horror and trembling fear
Phthonus ( ), spirit of envy and jealousy
Pistis ( ), spirit of trust, honesty, and good faith
Poine ( ), spirit of retribution, vengeance, recompense, punishment, and penalty for the crime of murder and manslaughter
Polemos ( ), personification of war
Ponos ( ), spirit of hard labour and toil
Poros ( ), spirit of expediency, the means of accomplishing or providing, contrivance and device
Praxidike ( ), spirit of exacting justice
Proioxis ( ), spirit of onrush and battlefield pursuit
Prophasis ( ), spirit of excuses and pleas
Ptocheia ( ), spirit of beggary
Roma, a female deity who personified the city of Rome
Soter ( ), male spirit of safety, preservation, and deliverance from harm
Soteria ( ), female personification of safety, preservation, and deliverance from harm
Sophrosyne ( ), spirit of moderation, self-control, temperance, restraint, and discretion
Tekhne ( ) personification of art, craft and technical skill
Thanatos ( ), personification of death and mortality
Thrasos ( ), spirit of boldness
Tyche ( ), goddess of fortune, chance, providence, and fate
Zelos (  ), spirit of eager rivalry, emulation, envy, jealousy, and zeal
 Eros
 Hermes watches Hypnos and Thanatos carry the dead Sarpedon from the battlefield at Troy (Euphronios Krater)
Chthonic deities
Amphiaraus ( ), a seer, and one of the Seven against Thebes who became an oracular spirit of the Underworld after his death
Angelos ( ), a daughter of Zeus and Hera who became an underworld goddess
Askalaphos ( ), the son of Acheron and Orphne who tended the Underworld orchards before being transformed into a screech owl by Demeter
Charon ( ), ferryman of Hades
Cronus ( ), deposed king of the Titans; after his release from Tartarus he was appointed king of the Island of the Blessed
Erebos ( ), the primeval god of darkness, his mists encircled the underworld and filled the hollows of the earth
The Erinyes ( ), the Furies, goddesses of retribution, known as "The Kindly Ones"
Alecto ( ), the unceasing one
Tisiphone ( ), avenger of murder
Megaera ( ), the jealous one
Hades ( ) God of underworld and all things beneath the earth
Hecate ( ), goddess of magic, witchcraft, the night, the Moon, ghosts, and necromancy
Judges of the Dead
Aiakos ( ), former mortal king of Aegina, guardian of the keys of Hades and judge of the men of Europe
Minos ( ), former mortal king of Crete and judge of the final vote
Rhadamanthys ( ), former mortal lawmaker and judge of the men of Asia
Keuthonymos ( ), an Underworld spirit and father of Menoetes
Lampades ( ), torch-bearing Underworld nymphs
Gorgyra ( )
Orphne ( ), a Lampad nymph of Hades, mother of Askalaphos
Macaria ( ), daughter of Hades and goddess of blessed death (not to be confused with the daughter of Heracles)
Melinoe ( ), daughter of Persephone and Zeus who presided over the propitiations offered to the ghosts of the dead
Menoetes ( ), an Underworld spirit who herded the cattle of Hades
Nyx ( ), the primeval goddess of night
Persephone ( ), queen of the underworld, wife of Hades and goddess of spring growth
Rivers of the Underworld
Acheron ( ), the river of woe
Alpheus ( ), the white river
Eridanos ( ), the river of amber
Kokytos (K ), the river of wailing
Lethe ( ), the river of forgetfulness (its counterpart was the waters of Mnemosyne)
Phlegethon ( ), the river of fire
Styx ( ), the river of hatred and oaths
Tartarus ( ), the primeval god of the dark, stormy pit of Hades
Thanatos ( ), personification of death
Zagreus ( ), an underworld god, possibly a son of Zeus and Persephone
Sea deities
Aegaeon ( ), god of violent sea storms and ally of the Titans
Amphitrite ( ), sea goddess and consort of Poseidon
Benthesikyme ( ), daughter of Poseidon, who resided in Ethiopia
Brizo ( ), patron goddess of sailors, who sent prophetic dreams
Ceto ( ), goddess of the dangers of the ocean and of sea monsters
Cymopoleia ( ), a daughter of Poseidon married to the Giant Briareus
Delphin ( ), dolphin god or daimone [13]
Eidothea ( ), prophetic sea nymph and daughter of Proteus
Glaucus ( ), the fisherman's sea god and oracle
Leucothea ( ), a sea goddess who aided sailors in distress
Nereides ( ), sea nymphs
Arethusa ( ), a daughter of Nereus who was transformed into a fountain
Dynamene ( ), associated with the might and power of great ocean swells
Galene ( ), goddess of calm seas
Psamathe ( ), goddess of sand beaches
Thetis ( ), leader of the Nereids who presided over the spawning of marine life in the sea
Nereus ( ), the old man of the sea, and the god of the sea's rich bounty of fish
Nerites ( ), a sea spirit who was transformed into a shell-fish by Aphrodite
Oceanides ( ), sea nymphs, and patronesses of bodies of fresh waterSome notable Oceanides include:
Asia/Clymene, wife of Iapetus
Clymene, mother of the demigod Phaethon
Clytie, who turned into a heliotropium when Helios left her
Doris, the wife of the sea-god Nereus
Idyia ( ), wife of the Colchian king Aeetes, mother of Medea
Leuce, first wife of Hades, became a white poplar tree
Metis, Zeus' first wife, whom Zeus impregnated with Athena and then swallowed
Styx, goddess of the river Styx
Theia, mother of the Cercopes
For a more complete list, see List of Oceanids
Oceanus ( ), god of the Earth-encircling river Oceanus (the ocean), the fountain of all the Earth's freshwater
Potamoi ( ), Gods of rivers and streams of the earthSome notable river gods include:
Achelous, the god of the Achelous River, the largest river in Greece, who gave his daughter in marriage to Alcmaeon
Alpheus, who fell in love with the nymph Arethusa
Inachus, the first king of Argos and progenitor of Argive line through his son grandson Argus
Nilus, Egyptian river god and the father of numerous daughters that mingled with the descendants of Inachus
Peneus, river god of Thessaly flowing from the foot of Pindus; father of Daphne and Stilbe
Scamander, who fought on the side of the Trojans during the Trojan War
Palaemon ( ), a young sea god who aided sailors in distress
Phorcys ( ), god of the hidden dangers of the deep
Pontus ( ), primordial god of the sea, father of the fish and other sea creatures, son of Gaia alone
Proteus ( ), a shape-shifting, prophetic old sea god, and the herdsman of Poseidon's seals
Poseidon ( ), king of the sea and lord of the sea gods; also god of rivers, flood and drought, earthquakes, and horses
Sangarius ( ), a river-god
The Telchines ( ), sea spirits native to the island of Rhodes; the gods killed them when they turned to evil magic
Actaeus ( )
Argyron ( )
Atabyrius ( )
Chalcon ( )
Chryson ( )
Damon ( ) or Demonax ( )
Damnameneus ( )
Dexithea ( ), mother of Euxanthios by Minos
Lycos ( ) or Lyktos ( )
Lysagora ( )?
Makelo ( )
Megalesius ( )
Mylas ( )
Nikon ( )
Ormenos ( )
Simon ( )
Skelmis ( )
Tethys ( ), goddess of the sources of fresh water, and the mother of the rivers, springs, streams, fountains, and clouds
Thalassa ( ), primeval goddess of the sea and consort of Pontos
Thaumas ( ), god of the wonders of the sea
Thoosa ( ), goddess of swift currents
Triteia ( ), daughter of Triton and companion of Ares
Triton ( ), fish-tailed son and herald of Poseidon
Tritones ( ), fish-tailed spirits in Poseidon's retinue
 Poseidon and Amphitrite framed by erotes and riding in a chariot drawn by hippocamps; below them are fishermen at work, with nymphs and creatures of the sea in the waters (color-enhanced Roman-era mosaic)
Sky deities
Aeolus (Aiolos) ( ), god of the winds
Aether ( ), primeval god of the upper air
Alectrona ( ), solar goddess of the morning or waking up
Anemoi, ( ), gods of the winds
Aparctias ( ), another name for the north wind (not identified with Boreas)
Apheliotes ( ), god of the east wind (when Eurus is considered southeast)
Argestes ( ), another name for the west or northwest wind
Boreas ( ), god of the north wind and of winter
Caicias ( ), god of the northeast wind
Circios ( ) or Thraskias ( ), god of the north-northwest wind
Euronotus ( ), god of the southeast wind
Eurus ( ), god of the unlucky east or southeast wind
Lips ( ), god of the southwest wind
Notus ( ) god of the south wind
Skeiron ( ), god of the northwest wind
Zephyrus ( ), god of the west wind
Arke ( ), messenger of the Titans and sister of Iris
Astraios ( ), god of stars and planets, and the art of astrology
The Astra Planeti (   ), gods of the five wandering stars or planets
Stilbon ( ), god of Hermaon, the planet Mercury
Eosphorus ( ), god of Venus the morning star
Hesperus ( ), god of Venus the evening star
Pyroeis ( ), god of Areios, the planet Mars
Phaethon ( ), god of Dios, the planet Jupiter
Phaenon ( ), god of Kronion, the planet Saturn
Astrape and Bronte, goddesses of lightning and thunder respectively
Aurai ( ), nymphs of the cooling breeze
Aura ( ), goddess of the breeze and the fresh, cool air of early morning
Chione ( ), goddess of snow and daughter of Boreas
Eos ( ), goddess of the Dawn
Ersa ( ), goddess of the morning dew
Helios ( ), god of the Sun and guardian of oaths
Hemera ( ), primeval goddess of the day
Hera ( ), queen of the gods
The Hesperides, ( ), nymphs of the evening and sunset
Iris ( ), goddess of the rainbow and divine messenger
Men ( ), a lunar deity worshiped in the western interior parts of Anatolia
Nephele ( ), cloud nymph
Nyx, ( ), goddess of night
Pandia ( ), daughter of Selene and Zeus
The Pleiades ( ), goddesses of the star cluster Pleiades and were associated with rain
Alcyone ( )
Sterope ( )
Celaeno ( )
Electra ( )
Maia ( )
Merope ( )
Taygete ( )
Sabazios ( ), the nomadic horseman and sky father god of the Phrygians and Thracians
Selene ( ), goddess of the Moon
Uranus ( ), primeval god of the heavens
Zeus ( ), King of Heaven and god of the sky, clouds, thunder, and lightning
Rustic deities
Aetna ( ), goddess of the volcanic Mount Etna in Sicily
Agreus and Nomios two goat-legged daimones of hunting & hurding
Amphictyonis ( ), goddess of wine and friendship between nations, a local form of Demeter
Anthousai ( ), flower nymphs
Aristaeus ( ), god of bee-keeping, cheese-making, herding, olive-growing, and hunting
Attis ( ), vegetation god and consort of Cybele
Britomartis ( ), Cretan goddess of hunting and nets used for fishing, fowling and the hunting of small game
Meliseus, god of bees and bee-keeping in Crete.
Cabeiri ( ), gods or spirits who presided over the Mysteries of the islands of Lemnos and Samothrace
Aitnaios ( )
Alkon ( )
Eurymedon ( )
Onnes ( )
Tonnes ( )
Chloris ( ), minor flower nymph and wife of Zephyrus
Comus ( ), god of revelry, merrymaking, and festivity
Corymbus ( ), god of the fruit of the ivy
The Curetes ( ), guardians of infant Zeus on Mount Ida, barely distinguished from the Dactyls and the Corybantes
Cybele ( ), a Phrygian mountain goddess
The Dactyls ( ) "fingers", minor deities originally representing fingers of a hand
Acmon ( )
Damnameneus ( )
Delas ( )
Epimedes ( )
Heracles (not to be confused with the hero Heracles)
Iasios ( )
Kelmis ( )
Skythes ( )
companions of Cybele
Titias ( )
Cyllenus ( )
Dionysus ( ), god of wine, drunken orgies, and wild vegetation
Dryades ( ), tree and forest nymphs
Gaia ( ), primeval goddess of the earth
Epimeliades ( ), nymphs of highland pastures and protectors of sheep flocks
Hamadryades ( ), oak tree dryades
Hecaterus ( ), minor god of the hekateris   a rustic dance of quickly moving hands   and perhaps of the skill of hands in general
Hermes ( ), god of herds and flocks, of roads and boundary stones, and the god of thieves
Korybantes ( ), the crested dancers who worshipped Cybele
Damneus ( ) "the one who tames(?)"
Idaios ( ) "of Mount Ida"
Kyrbas ( ), whose name is probably a variant of Korybas, singular for "Korybantes"
Okythoos ( ) "the one running swiftly"
Prymneus ( ) "of lower areas(?)"
Pyrrhichos ( ), god of the rustic dance
Ma, a local goddess at Comana in Cappadocia
Maenades ( ), crazed nymphs in the retinue of Dionysus
Methe ( ), nymph of drunkenness
Meliae ( ), nymphs of honey and the ash tree
Naiades ( ), fresh water nymphs
Daphne ( )
Metope ( )
Minthe ( )
The Nymphai Hyperboreioi (   ), who presided over aspects of archery
Hekaerge ( ), represented distancing
Loxo ( ), represented trajectory
Oupis ( ), represented aim
Oreades ( ), mountain nymphs
Adrasteia ( ), a nursemaid of the infant Zeus
Cyllene, the mountain-nymph who nursed the infant Hermes
Echo ( ), a nymph cursed never to speak except to repeat the words of others
The Ourea ( ), primeval gods of mountains
The Palici ( ), a pair of rustic gods who presided over the geysers and thermal springs in Sicily
Pan ( ), god of shepherds, pastures, and fertility
Pan Sybarios (   ) god of Woods and vales
Phaunos god of forests not identified with Faunus
Potamoi ( ), river gods
Achelous ( )
Acis ( )
Alpheus ( )
Asopus ( )
Cladeus ( )
Eurotas ( )
Nilus ( )
Peneus ( )
Scamander ( )
For a more complete list, see Potamoi#List of potamoi
Priapus ( ), god of garden fertility
Satyrs ( ) / Satyress, rustic fertility spirits
Krotos ( ), a great hunter and musician who kept the company of the Muses on Mount Helicon
Silenus ( ), an old rustic god of the dance of the wine-press
Telete ( ), goddess of initiation into the Bacchic orgies
Zagreus ( ), in the Orphic mysteries, the first incarnation of Dionysus
Agricultural deities
Adonis ( ), a life-death-rebirth deity
Aphaea ( ), minor goddess of agriculture and fertility
Cyamites ( ), demi-god of the bean
Demeter ( ), goddess of fertility, agriculture, grain, and harvest
Despoina ( ), daughter of Poseidon and Demeter, goddess of mysteries in Arcadia
Dionysus ( ), god of viticulture and wine
Eunostus ( ), goddess of the flour mill
Persephone ( ), queen of the underworld, wife of Hades and goddess of spring growth
Philomelus ( ), agricultural demi-god inventor of the wagon and the plough
Plutus ( ), god of wealth, including agricultural wealth, son of Demeter
Promylaia ( ) a goddess of the flower mill
Triptolemus ( ), god of farming and agriculture, he brought agriculture to Greece
Trokhilos ( ) god of the mill stone
Health deities
Apollo ( ), god of archery, music and dance, truth and prophecy, healing and diseases, the Sun and light, poetry, and more.
Asclepius ( ), god of medicine
Aceso ( ), goddess of the healing of wounds and the curing of illnesses
Aegle ( ), goddess of radiant good health
Chiron ( ), god of healing (up for debate if it is a god)
Darrhon ( ), Macedonian god of health
Epione ( ), goddess of the soothing of pain
Hygieia ( ), goddess of cleanliness and good health
Iaso ( ), goddess of cures, remedies, and modes of healing
Paean ( ), physician of the gods
Panacea ( ), goddess of healing
Telesphorus ( ), demi-god of convalescence, who "brought to fulfillment" recuperation from illness or injury
Sleep deities
Empusa ( ), goddess of shape-shifting
Epiales ( ), goddess of nightmares
Hypnos ( ) god of sleep
Pasithea ( ) goddess of relaxing meditation and hallucinations
Oneiroi ( ) god of dreams
Morpheus ( ) god of dreaming
Charities
Charites ( ), goddesses of charm, beauty, nature, human creativity, and fertility
Aglaea ( ), goddess of beauty, adornment, splendor, and glory
Euphrosyne ( ), goddess of good cheer, joy, mirth, and merriment
Thalia ( ), goddess of festive celebrations and rich and luxurious banquets
Hegemone ( ) "mastery"
Antheia ( ), goddess of flowers and flowery wreaths
Pasithea ( ), goddess of rest and relaxation
Cleta ( ) "the glorious"
Phaenna ( ) "the shining"
Eudaimonia ( ) "happiness"
Euthymia ( ) "good mood"
Calleis ( ) "beauty"
Paidia ( ) "play, amusement"
Pandaisia ( ) "banquet for everyone"
Pannychis ( ) "all-night (festivity)"
Horae
The Horae ( ), The Hours, the goddesses of natural order
Eunomia ( ), spirit of good order, and springtime goddess of green pastures
Dike ( ), spirit of justice, may have represented springtime growth
Eirene ( ), spirit of peace and goddess of the springtime
The goddesses of springtime growth
Thallo ( ), goddess of spring buds and shoots, identified with Eirene
Auxo ( ), goddess of spring growth
Karpo ( ), goddess of the fruits of the earth
The goddesses of welfare
Pherousa ( ) "the bringer"
Euporie ( ) "abundance"
Orthosie ( ) "prosperity"
The goddesses of the natural portions of time and the times of day
Auge ( ), first light of the morning
Anatole ( ) or Anatolia ( ), sunrise
Mousika or Musica ( ), the morning hour of music and study
Gymnastika, Gymnastica ( ) or Gymnasia ( ), the morning hour of gymnastics/exercise
Nymphe ( ), the morning hour of ablutions (bathing, washing)
Mesembria ( ), noon
Sponde ( ), libations poured after lunch
Elete, prayer, the first of the afternoon work hours
Akte, Acte ( ) or Cypris ( ), eating and pleasure, the second of the afternoon work hours
Hesperis ( ), evening
Dysis ( ), sunset
Arktos ( ), night sky, constellation
The goddesses of seasons of the year
Eiar ( ), spring
Theros ( ), summer
Pthinoporon ( ), autumn
Cheimon ( ), winter
Muses
Muses ( ), goddesses of music, song and dance, and the source of inspiration to poets
Name
Titan Muses, daughters of Uranus and Gaia
Aoide ( )
muse of song
Arche ( )
muse of origins
Melete ( )
muse of meditation and practice
Mneme ( )
muse of memory
Thelxinoe ( )
muse "charmer of minds"
Olympian Muses, daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne
Calliope ( )
muse of epic poetry
Clio ( )
muse of history
Euterpe ( )
muse of musical poetry
Erato ( )
muse of lyric poetry
Melpomene ( )
muse of tragedy
Polyhymnia ( ) or ( )
muse of sacred poetry
Terpsichore ( )
muse of dance and choral poetry
Thalia ( )
muse of comedy and bucolic poetry
Urania ( )
muse of astronomy
Muses worshiped at Delphi, daughters of Apollo
Cephisso ( )
also Hypate ( ), "the upper (chord of the lyre)"
Apollonis ( )
also Mese ( ), "the middle (chord of the lyre)"
Borysthenis ( )
also Nete ( ), "the lowest (chord of the lyre)"
Muses worshiped at Sicyon
Polymatheia ( )
muse of knowledge
Other deities
Acratopotes ( ), god of unmixed wine
Agdistis ( ), Phrygian hermaphroditic deity
Alexiares and Anicetus (  and  ), twin sons of Heracles who presided over the defence of fortified towns and citadels
Aphroditus ( ), Cyprian hermaphroditic Aphrodite
Astraea ( ), virgin goddess of justice
Auxesia ( ) and Damia ( ), two local fertility goddesses
Bendis ( ), Thracian goddess of the hunt and the Moon. Her worship seems to have been introduced into Attica around 430 BC.[14]
Ceraon ( ), demi-god of the meal, specifically the mixing of wine
Chrysus ( ), spirit of gold
Circe ( ), goddess-witch of Aeaea
Daemones Ceramici (   ), five malevolent spirits who plagued the craftsman potter
Syntribos ( ), the shatterer
Smaragos ( ), the smasher
Asbetos ( ), the charrer
Sabaktes ( ), the destroyer
Omodamos ( ), crudebake
Deipneus ( ), demi-god of the preparation of meals, specifically the making of bread
Eileithyia ( ), goddess of childbirth
Enodia, Thessalian goddess of crossroads
Enyalius ( ), minor god of war
Enyo ( ), goddess of destructive war
Epidotes ( ), a divinity who was worshipped at Lacedaemon[15]
Glycon ( ), a snake god
Harpocrates ( ), god of silence
Hebe ( ), goddess of youth and cup-bearer to the Olympians
Hermaphroditus ( ), god of hermaphrodites and effeminate men
Hymenaios ( ), god of marriage and marriage feasts
Ichnaea ( ), goddess of tracking
Iynx ( ), goddess of the love charm
Matton ( ), demi-god of the meal, specifically the kneading of dough
Mene ( ), goddess of the months
Palaestra ( ), goddess of wrestling
Pasipha  ( ), witch-goddess and queen of Crete
Rhapso ( ), minor goddess or nymph whose name apparently refers to sewing
Sosipolis (god), a native god at Elis, son of the goddess Eileithyia
Mortals
Deified mortals
Achilles ( ), hero of the Trojan War
Aiakos ( ), a king of Aegina, appointed as a Judge of the Dead in the Underworld after his death
Aeolus ( ), a king of Thessaly, made the immortal king of all the winds by Zeus
Alabandus ( ), he was the founder of the town of Alabanda
Amphiaraus ( ), a hero of the war of the Seven against Thebes who became an oracular spirit of the Underworld after his death
Ariadne ( ), a Cretan princess who became the immortal wife of Dionysus
Aristaeus ( ), a Thessalian hero, his inventions saw him immortalised as the god of bee-keeping, cheese-making, herding, olive-growing, and hunting
Asclepius ( ), a Thessalian physician who was struck down by Zeus for reviving the dead, to be later recovered by his father Apollo
Attis ( ), a consort of Cybele, granted immortality as one of her attendants
Bolina ( ), a mortal woman transformed into an immortal nymph by Apollo
The Dioscuri ( ), divine twins
Castor ( )
Pollux ( )
Endymion ( ), lover of Selene, granted eternal sleep so as never to age or die
Ganymede ( ), a handsome Trojan prince, abducted by Zeus and made cup-bearer of the gods
Glaucus ( ), the fisherman's sea god, made immortal after eating a magical herb
Hemithea ( ) and Parthenos ( ), princesses of the Island of Naxos who leapt into the sea to escape their father's wrath; Apollo transformed them into demi-goddesses
Heracles ( ), ascended hero
 Athena pouring a drink for Heracles, who wears the skin of the Nemean Lion
Ino ( ), a Theban princess who became the sea goddess Leucothea
Lampsace ( ), a semi-historical Bebrycian princess honored as goddess for her assistance to the Greeks
The Leucippides ( ), wives of the Dioscuri
Phoebe ( ), wife of Pollux
Hilaera ( ), wife of Castor
Minos ( ), a king of Crete, appointed as a Judge of the Dead in the Underworld after his death
Orithyia ( ), an Athenian princess abducted by Boreas and made the goddess of cold, gusty mountain winds
Palaemon ( ), a Theban prince, made into a sea god along with his mother, Ino
Philoctetes (Ancient Greek:  ), was the son of King Poeas of Meliboea in Thessaly, a famous archer, fought at the Trojan War
Phylonoe ( ), daughter of Tyndareus and Leda, made immortal by Artemis
Psyche ( ), goddess of the soul
Semele ( ), mortal mother of Dionysus, who later was made the goddess Thyone ( )
Tenes ( ), was a hero of the island of Tenedos
Heroes
Abderus, aided Heracles during his eighth labour and was killed by the Mares of Diomedes
Achilles (  or  ), hero of the Trojan War and a central character in Homer's Iliad
Aeneas ( ), a hero of the Trojan War and progenitor of the Roman people
Ajax the Great (     ), a hero of the Trojan War and king of Salamis
Ajax the Lesser (     ), a hero of the Trojan War and leader of the Locrian army
Amphitryon ( ), Theban general who rescued Thebes from the Teumessian fox; his wife was Alcmene, mother of Heracles
Antilochus ( ), Son of Nestor sacrificed himself to save his father in the Trojan War along with other deeds of valor
Bellerophon ( ), hero who slew the Chimera
Bouzyges, a hero credited with inventing agricultural practices such as yoking oxen to a plough
Castor, the mortal Dioscuri twin; after Castor's death, his immortal brother Pollux shared his divinity with him in order that they might remain together
Chrysippus ( ), a divine hero of Elis
Daedalus ( ), creator of the labyrinth and great inventor, until King Minos trapped him in his own creation
Diomedes ( ), a king of Argos and hero of the Trojan War
Eleusis (  or  ), eponymous hero of the town of Eleusis
Eunostus, a Boeotian hero
Ganymede ( ), Trojan hero and lover of Zeus, who was given immortality and appointed cup-bearer to the gods
Hector ( ), hero of the Trojan War and champion of the Trojan people
Icarus ( ), the son of the master craftsman Daedalus
Iolaus ( ), nephew of Heracles who aided his uncle in one of his Labors
Jason ( ), leader of the Argonauts
Meleager ( ), a hero who sailed with the Argonauts and killed the Calydonian boar
Odysseus (  or  ), a hero and king of Ithaca whose adventures are the subject of Homer's Odyssey; he also played a key role during the Trojan War
Orpheus ( ), a legendary musician and poet who attempted to retrieve his dead wife from the Underworld
Pandion ( ), the eponymous hero of the Attic tribe Pandionis, usually assumed to be one of the legendary Athenian kings Pandion I or Pandion II
Perseus ( ), son of Zeus and the founder-king of Mycenae and slayer of the Gorgon Medusa
Theseus ( ), son of Poseidon and a king of Athens and slayer of the Minotaur
Notable women
Alcestis ( ), daughter of Pelias and wife of Admetus, who was known for her devotion to her husband
Amymone, the one daughter of Danaus who refused to murder her husband, thus escaping her sisters' punishment
Andromache ( ), wife of Hector
Andromeda ( ), wife of Perseus, who was placed among the constellations after her death
Antigone ( ), daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta
Arachne ( ), a skilled weaver, transformed by Athena into a spider for her blasphemy
Ariadne ( ), daughter of Minos, king of Crete, who aided Theseus in overcoming the Minotaur and became the wife of Dionysus
Atalanta ( ), fleet-footed heroine who participated in the Calydonian boar hunt and the quest for the Golden Fleece
Briseis, a princess of Lyrnessus, taken by Achilles as a war prize
Caeneus, formerly Caenis, a woman who was transformed into a man and became a mighty warrior
Cassandra, a princess of Troy cursed to see the future but never to be believed
Cassiopeia ( ), queen of  thiopia and mother of Andromeda
Clytemnestra, sister of Helen and unfaithful wife of Agamemnon
Dana , the mother of Perseus by Zeus
Deianeira, the third wife and unwitting killer of Heracles
Electra, daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, she aided her brother Orestes in plotting revenge against their mother for the murder of their father
Europa, a Phoenician woman, abducted by Zeus
Hecuba ( ), wife of Priam, king of Troy, and mother of nineteen of his children
Helen, daughter of Zeus and Leda, whose abduction brought about the Trojan War
Hermione ( ), daughter of Menelaus and Helen; wife of Neoptolemus, and later Orestes
Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra; Agamemnon sacrificed her to Artemis in order to appease the goddess
Ismene, sister of Antigone
Jocasta, mother and wife of Oedipus
Medea, a sorceress and wife of Jason, who killed her own children to punish Jason for his infidelity
Medusa, a mortal woman transformed into a hideous gorgon by Athena
Niobe, a daughter of Tantalus who declared herself to be superior to Leto, causing Artemis and Apollo to kill her fourteen children
Pandora, the first woman
Penelope, loyal wife of Odysseus
Phaedra, daughter of Minos and wife of Theseus
Polyxena, the youngest daughter of Priam, sacrificed to the ghost of Achilles
Semele, mortal mother of Dionysus
Thrace, the daughter of Oceanus and Parthenope, and sister of Europa
Kings
Abas, a king of Argos
Acastus, a king of Iolcus who sailed with the Argonauts and participated in the Calydonian boar hunt
Acrisius, a king of Argos
Actaeus, first king of Attica
Admetus ( ), a king of Pherae who sailed with the Argonauts and participated in the Calydonian boar hunt
Adrastus ( ), a king of Argos and one of the Seven against Thebes
Aeacus ( ), a king of the island of Aegina in the Saronic Gulf; after he died, he became one of the three judges of the dead in the Underworld
Ae tes, a king of Colchis and father of Medea
Aegeus ( ), a king of Athens and father of Theseus
Aegimius, a king of Thessaly and progenitor of the Dorians
Aegisthus ( ), lover of Clytemnestra, with whom he plotted to murder Agamemnon and seized the kingship of Mycenae
Aegyptus ( ), a king of Egypt
Aeson, father of Jason and rightful king of Iolcus, whose throne was usurped by his half-brother Pelias
A thlius, first king of Elis
Aetolus ( ), a king of Elis
Agamemnon ( ), a king of Mycenae and commander of the Greek armies during the Trojan War
Agasthenes, a king of Elis
Agenor ( ), a king of Phoenicia
Alcinous (  or  ), a king of Phaeacia
Alcmaeon, a king of Argos and one of the Epigoni
Aleus, a king of Tegea
Amphiaraus ( ), a seer and king of Argos who participated in the Calydonian boar hunt and the war of the Seven against Thebes
Amphictyon ( ), a king of Athens
Amphion and Zethus, twin sons of Zeus and kings of Thebes, who constructed the city's walls
Amycus, son of Poseidon and king of the Bebryces
Anaxagoras ( ), a king of Argos
Anchises ( ), a king of Dardania and father of Aeneas
Arcesius, a king of Ithaca and father of Laertes
Argeus, a king of Argos
Argus, a son of Zeus and king of Argos after Phoroneus
Assaracus, a king of Dardania
Asterion, a king of Crete
Athamas ( ), a king of Orchomenus
Atreus ( ), a king of Mycenae and father of Agamemnon and Menelaus
Augeas ( ), a king of Elis
Autesion, a king of Thebes
Bias, a king of Argos
Busiris, a king of Egypt
Cadmus, founder-king of Thebes
Car, a king of Megara
Catreus, a king of Crete, prophesied to die at the hands of his own son
Cecrops, an autochthonous king of Athens
Ceisus, a king of Argos
Celeus, a king of Eleusis
Cephalus, a king of Phocis who accidentally killed his own wife
Cepheus, a king of Ethiopia
Cepheus, a king of Tegea and an Argonaut
Charnabon, a king of the Getae
Cinyras, a king of Cyprus and father of Adonis
Codrus, a king of Athens
Corinthus, founder-king of Corinth
Cranaus, a king of Athens
Creon, a king of Thebes, brother of Jocasta and uncle of Oedipus
Creon, a king of Corinth who was hospitable towards Jason and Medea
Cres, an early Cretan king
Cresphontes, a king of Messene and descendant of Heracles
Cretheus, founder-king of Iolcus
Criasus, a king of Argos
Cylarabes, a king of Argos
Cynortas, a king of Sparta
Cyzicus, king of the Dolionians, mistakenly killed by the Argonauts
Danaus, a king of Egypt and father of the Danaides
Dardanus, founder-king of Dardania, and son of Zeus and Electra
Deiphontes, a king of Argos
Demophon of Athens, a king of Athens
Diomedes, a king of Argos and hero of the Trojan War
Echemus, a king of Arcadia
Echetus, a king of Epirus
Eetion, a king of Cilician Thebe and father of Andromache
Electryon, a king of Tiryns and Mycenae; son of Perseus and Andromeda
Elephenor, a king of the Abantes of Euboea
Eleusis, eponym and king of Eleusis, Attica
Epaphus, a king of Egypt and founder of Memphis, Egypt
Epopeus, a king of Sicyon
Erechtheus, a king of Athens
Erginus, a king of Minyean Orchomenus in Boeotia
Erichthonius, a king of Athens, born of Hephaestus' attempt to rape Athena
Eteocles, a king of Thebes and son of Oedipus; he and his brother Polynices killed each other
Eteocles, son of Andreus, a king of Orchomenus
Eurotas, a king of Sparta
Eurystheus, a king of Tiryns
Euxantius, a king of Ceos, son of Minos and Dexithea
Gelanor, a king of Argos
Haemus, a king of Thrace
Helenus, seer and twin brother of Cassandra, who later became king of Epirus
Hippotho n, a king of Eleusis
Hyrieus, a king of Boeotia
Ilus, founder-king of Troy
Ixion, a king of the Lapiths who attempted to rape Hera and was bound to a flaming wheel in Tartarus
La rtes, father of Odysseus and king of the Cephallenians; he sailed with the Argonauts and participated in the Calydonian boar hunt
Laomedon, a king of Troy and father of Priam
Lycaon of Arcadia, a deceitful Arcadian king who was transformed by Zeus into a wolf
Lycurgus of Arcadia, a king of Arcadia
Lycurgus, a king of Nemea, and/or a priest of Zeus at Nemea
Makedon, a king of Macedon
Megareus of Onchestus, a king of Onchestus in Boeotia
Megareus of Thebes, a king of Thebes
Melampus, a legendary soothsayer and healer, and king of Argos
Melanthus, a king of Messenia
Memnon, a king of Ethiopia who fought on the side of Troy during the Trojan War
Menelaus, a king of Sparta and the husband of Helen
Menestheus, a king of Athens who fought on the side of the Greeks during the Trojan War
Midas, a king of Phrygia granted the power to turn anything to gold with a touch
Minos, a king of Crete; after his death, became one of the judges of the dead in the Underworld
Myles, a king of Laconia
Nestor, a king of Pylos who sailed with the Argonauts, participated in the Calydonian boar hunt and fought with the Greek armies in the Trojan War
Nycteus, a king of Thebes
Odysseus, a hero and king of Ithaca whose adventures are the subject of Homer's Odyssey; he also played a key role during the Trojan War
Oebalus, a king of Sparta
Oedipus, a king of Thebes fated to kill his father and marry his mother
Oeneus, a king of Calydon
Oenomaus, a king of Pisa
Oenopion, a king of Chios
Ogygus, a king of Thebes
Oicles, a king of Argos
Oileus, a king of Locris
Orestes, a king of Argos and a son of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon; he killed his mother in revenge for her murder of his father
Oxyntes, a king of Athens
Pandion I, a king of Athens
Pandion II, a king of Athens
Peleus, king of the Myrmidons and father of Achilles; he sailed with the Argonauts and participated in the Calydonian boar hunt
Pelias, a king of Iolcus and usurper of Aeson's rightful throne
Pelops, a king of Pisa and founder of the House of Atreus
Pentheus, a king of Thebes who banned the worship of Dionysus and was torn apart by Maenads
Periphas, legendary king of Attica who Zeus turned into an eagle
Perseus ( ), founder-king of Mycenae and slayer of the Gorgon Medusa
Phineus, a king of Thrace
Phlegyas, a king of the Lapiths
Phoenix, son of Agenor, founder-king of Phoenicia
Phoroneus, a king of Argos
Phyleus, a king of Elis
Piritho s, king of the Lapiths and husband of Hippodamia, at whose wedding the Battle of Lapiths and Centaurs occurred
Pittheus, a king of Troezen and grandfather of Theseus
Polybus of Corinth, a king of Corinth
Polybus of Sicyon, a king of Sicyon and son of Hermes
Polybus of Thebes, a king of Thebes
Polynices, a king of Thebes and son of Oedipus; he and his brother Eteocles killed each other
Priam, king of Troy during the Trojan War
Proetus, a king of Argos and Tiryns
Pylades, a king of Phocis and friend of Orestes
Rhadamanthys, a king of Crete; after his death, he became a judge of the dead in the Underworld
Rhesus, a king of Thrace who sided with Troy in the Trojan War
Sarpedon, a king of Lycia and son of Zeus who fought on the side of the Greeks during the Trojan War
Sisyphus, a king of Thessaly who attempted to cheat death and was sentenced to an eternity of rolling a boulder up a hill, only to watch it roll back down
Sithon, a king of Thrace
Talaus, a king of Argos who sailed with the Argonauts
Tegyrios, a king of Thrace
Telamon, a king of Salamis and father of Ajax; he sailed with the Argonauts and participated in the Calydonian boar hunt
Telephus, a king of Mysia and son of Heracles
Temenus, a king of Argos and descendant of Heracles
Teucer, founder-king of Salamis who fought alongside the Greeks in the Trojan War
Teutamides, a king of Larissa
Teuthras, a king of Mysia
Thersander, a king of Thebes and one of the Epigoni
Theseus, a king of Athens and slayer of the Minotaur
Thyestes, a king of Mycenae and brother of Atreus
Tisamenus, a king of Argos, Mycenae, and Sparta
Tyndareus, a king of Sparta
Seers/oracles
Amphilochus ( ), a seer and brother of Alcmaeon who died in the war of the Seven against Thebes
Anius, son of Apollo who prophesied that the Trojan War would be won in its tenth year
Asbolus, a seer Centaur
Bakis
Branchus, a seer and son of Apollo
Calchas, an Argive seer who aided the Greeks during the Trojan War
Carnus, an Acarnanian seer and lover of Apollo
Carya, a seer and lover of Dionysus
Cassandra, a princess of Troy cursed to see the future but never to be believed
Ennomus, a Mysian seer, killed by Achilles during the Trojan War
Halitherses, an Ithacan seer who warned Penelope's suitors of Odysseus' return
Helenus, seer and twin brother of Cassandra, who later became king of Epirus
Iamus, a son of Apollo possessing the gift of prophecy, he founded the Iamidai
Idmon, a seer who sailed with the Argonauts
Manto, seer and daughter of Tiresias
Melampus, a legendary soothsayer and healer, and king of Argos
Mopsus, the name of two legendary seers
Polyeidos, a Corinthian seer who saved the life of Glaucus
Pythia, the oracle of Delphi
Telemus, a seer who foresaw that the Cyclops Polyphemus would be blinded by Odysseus
Theoclymenus, an Argive seer
Tiresias, blind prophet of Thebes
Amazons
Aegea, a queen of the Amazons
Aella ( ), an Amazon who was killed by Heracles
Alcibie ( ), an Amazonian warrior, killed by Diomedes at Troy
Antandre ( ), an Amazonian warrior, killed by Achilles at Troy
Antiope ( ), a daughter of Ares and sister of Hippolyta
Areto ( ), an Amazon
Asteria ( ), an Amazon who was killed by Heracles
Bremusa ( ), an Amazonian warrior, killed by Idomeneus at Troy
Celaeno ( ), an Amazonian warrior, killed by Heracles
Eurypyle ( ), an Amazon leader who invaded Ninus and Babylonia
Hippolyta ( ), a queen of Amazons and daughter of Ares
Hippothoe ( ), an Amazonian warrior, killed by Achilles at Troy
Iphito ( ), an Amazon who served under Hippolyta
Lampedo ( ), an Amazon queen who ruled with her sister Marpesia
Marpesia ( ), an Amazon queen who ruled with her sister Lampedo
Melanippe ( ), a daughter of Ares and sister of Hippolyta and Antiope
Molpadia ( ), an Amazon who killed Antiope
Myrina ( ), a queen of the Amazons
Orithyia ( ), an Amazon queen
Otrera ( ), an Amazon queen, consort of Ares and mother of Hippolyta
Pantariste ( ), an Amazon who fought with Hippolyta against Heracles
Penthesilea ( ), an Amazon queen who fought in the Trojan War on the side of Troy
Thalestris ( ), a queen of the Amazons
 Achilles and Penthesileia (Lucanian red-figure bell-krater, late 5th century BC)
Inmates of Tartarus
The Danaides, forty-nine daughters of Danaus who murdered their husbands and were condemned to an eternity of carrying water in leaky jugs
Ixion, a king of the Lapiths who attempted to rape Hera and was bound to a flaming wheel in Tartarus
Sisyphus, a king of Thessaly who attempted to cheat death and was sentenced to an eternity of rolling a boulder up a hill, only to watch it roll back down
Tantalus, a king of Anatolia who butchered his son Pelops and served him as a meal to the gods; he was punished with the torment of starvation, food and drink eternally dangling just out of reach
Minor figures
Main article: List of minor Greek mythological figures
See also
Ancient Greece portalReligion portal
Classical mythology
Family tree of the Greek gods
List of Trojan War characters
Lists of deities
List of Roman deities
List of Mycenaean deities
Lists of legendary creatures
List of Greek mythological creatures
References
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Aphrodite. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Apollo. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Ares. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Artemis. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Athena. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Demeter. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Dionysus. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ March, Jennifer (2014). Dictionary of classical mythology. Hades. ISBN 9781782976356.
^ "12 Greek Gods and Goddesses". Encyclopedia Britannica.
^ Kereny, p. 92: "There is no story of Hestia's ever having taken a husband or ever having been removed from her fixed abode."
^ Beazley Archive 200059, LIMC Gigantes 342 Archived 2015-12-27 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Guirand, Felix, ed. (16 December 1987). New Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology. Crescent Books. ISBN 978-0-517-00404-3.
^ Oppian, Halieutica 1. 383 ff (trans. Mair) (Greek poet C3rd A.D.) :
"The Delphines (Dolphins) both rejoice in the echoing shores and dwell in the deep seas, and there is no sea without Delphines (Dophins); for Poseidon loves them exceedingly, inasmuch as when he was seeking Amphitrite the dark-eyed daughter of Nereus who fled from his embraces, Delphines (the Dolphins) marked her hiding in the halls of Okeanos (Oceanus) and told Poseidon; and the god of the dark hair straightway carried off the maiden and overcame her against her will. Her he made his bride, queen of the sea, and for their tidings he commended his kindly attendants and bestowed on them exceeding honour for their portion."
^ A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (1890), BENDIDEIA
^  Leonhard Schmitz (1870). "Epidotes".  In Smith, William (ed.). Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.
External links
Listen to this article (1 hour and 8 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 19 January 2009 (2009-01-19), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
 Media related to Characters in Greek mythology at Wikimedia Commons
vteAncient Greek religion and mythologyReligion and religious practiceMain beliefs
Ages of Man
Golden Age
Heroic Age
Ancient accounts of Homer
Apotheosis
Arete
Daemon
Destiny
Eudaimonia
Euhemerism
Eunoia
Eusebeia
Golden mean
Golden Rule
Greek words for love
Hemitheos
Hero cult
Hubris
Interpretatio graeca
Katabasis
Know thyself
Metempsychosis
Nympholepsy
Paradoxography
Patron gods
Pederasty
Phronesis
Polytheism
Sophrosyne
Soter
Theia mania
Xenia
Texts / odes /epic poemsEpic Cycle
Aethiopis
Cypria
Iliad
Iliupersis
Little Iliad
Nostoi
Odyssey
Telegony
Theban Cycle
Oedipodea
Thebaid
Epigoni
Alcmeonis
Others
Aesop's Fables
Aretalogy
Argonautica
Bibliotheca
Catalogue of Women
Cyranides
Delphic maxims
Derveni papyrus
Dionysiaca
Golden Verses of Pythagoras
Greek Magical Papyri
Homerica
Homeric Hymns
Interpretation of Dreams
Myth of Er
Oneirocritica
Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis
Sibylline Books
Sortes Astrampsychi
Theogony
Works and Days
ReligionsAntecedents
Minoan religion
Mycenaean religion
List of Mycenaean deities
Paleo-Balkan mythology
Proto-Indo-European mythology
Religions of the ancient Near East
Classical forms
Atheism
Classical polytheism
Monotheism
Pythagoreanism
Quasi-religious schools of philosophy
Hellenistic religions
Eastern Christianity
Egyptian religion
Ptolemaic cult of Alexander the Great
Esoteric systems
Early alchemy
Gnosticism
Hermeticism
Neoplatonism
Etruscan religion
Greco-Buddhism
Hellenistic Judaism
Roman religion
Mystery religionsand sacred mysteries
Arcadian Mysteries
Delos Mysteries
Dionysian Mysteries
Eleusinian Mysteries
Imbrian Mysteries
Mithraism
Mysteries of Isis
Orphism
Samothracian Mysteries
New religious movements
Discordianism
Feraferia
Gaianism
Hellenism
Religious practiceWorship / rituals
Amphidromia
Astragalomancy
Baptes
Daduchos
Divination
Funeral and burial practices
Funeral oration
Greco-Roman mysteries
Hero cult
Heroon
Hierophany
Hieros gamos
Hymns
Incubation
Komos
Nekyia
Omophagia
Orgia
Panegyris
Prayer
Sacrifice
Animal sacrifice
Hecatomb
Holocaust
Libation
Pharmakos
Votive offering
Theatre
Religiousoffices
Amphictyonic league
Archon basileus
Basilinna
Gerarai
Hiereiai
Hierophant
Hierophylakes
Iatromantis
Kanephoros
Mystagogue
Oracle
Sibyl
Thiasus
Religiousobjects
Baetylus
Cult image
Chryselephantine statue
Xoanon
Greek terracotta figurines
Kernos
Kykeon
Loutrophoros
Omphalos
Panathenaic amphora
Rhyton
Sacrificial tripod
Sceptre
Thymiaterion
Magic
Apotropaic magic
Curse tablet
Divination
Greek Magical Papyri
Hermeticism
Hermetica
Necromancy
Philia
EventsFestivals / feasts
Actia
Adonia
Agrionia
Amphidromia
Anthesteria
Apellai
Apaturia
Aphrodisia
Arrhephoria
Ascolia
Bendidia
Boedromia
Brauronia
Buphonia
Chalceia
Diasia
Delia
Delphinia
Dionysia
Ecdysia
Elaphebolia
Gamelia
Halieia
Haloa
Heracleia
Hermaea
Hieromenia
Iolaia
Kronia
Lenaia
Leucophryna
Lykaia
Metageitnia
Munichia
Oschophoria
Pamboeotia
Pandia
Plynteria
Ptolemaieia
Pyanopsia
Skira
Synoikia
Soteria
Tauropolia
Thargelia
Theseia
Thesmophoria
Games
Agon
Panathenaic Games
Rhieia
Panhellenic Games
Olympic Games
Heraean Games
Pythian Games
Nemean Games
Isthmian Games
Sacred placesTemples / sanctuaries
Delphinion
Mithraeum
Necromanteion of Acheron
Nymphaeum
Panionium
Parthenon
Ploutonion
Temenos
Temple of Artemis, Ephesus
Temple of Zeus, Olympia
Oracles
Amphiareion of Oropos
Aornum
Claros
Delphi
Didyma
Dodona
Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae
Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion
Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros
Oracle of Menestheus
Sanctuary of the Great Gods
Tegyra
Mountains
Cretea
Mount Ida (Crete)
Mount Ida (Turkey)
Mount Lykaion
Olympus
Caves
Cave of Zeus, Ayd n
Caves of Pan
Cave of Zeus, Crete
Psychro Cave
Vari Cave
Islands
Island of Achilles
Delos
Islands of Diomedes
Springs
Castalian Spring
Hippocrene
Pierian Spring
Others
Athenian sacred ships
Paralus
Salaminia
Eleusis
Hiera Orgas
Kanathos
Olympia
Sacred Way
Myths and mythologyDeitiesPrimordial deities
Aether
Aion
Ananke
Chaos
Chronos
Erebus
Eros
Gaia
Hemera
The Moirai (Fates)
Moros
Nyx
Phanes
Pontus
Thalassa
Tartarus
Uranus
TitansFirst generation
Coeus
Crius
Cronus
Hyperion
Iapetus
Mnemosyne
Oceanus
Phoebe
Rhea
Tethys
Theia
Themis
Second generation
Asteria
Astraeus
Atlas
Eos
Epimetheus
Helios
Leto
Menoetius
Metis
Pallas
Perses
Prometheus
Selene
Third generation
Hecate
Hesperus
Phosphorus
Twelve Olympians
Aphrodite
Apollo
Ares
Artemis
Athena
Demeter
Dionysus
Hephaestus
Hera
Hermes
Hestia
Poseidon
Zeus
Water deities
Amphitrite
Alpheus
Ceto
Glaucus
Naiads
Nereids
Nereus
Oceanids
Phorcys
Poseidon
Potamoi
Potamides
Proteus
Scamander
Thaumas
Thetis
Triton
Love deitiesErotes
Anteros
Eros
Hedylogos
Hermaphroditus
Himeros
 Hymen/Hymenaeus
Pothos
Aphrodite
Aphroditus
Philotes
Peitho
War deities
Adrestia
Alala
Alke
Amphillogiai
Androktasiai
Ares
Athena
Bia
Deimos
Enyalius
Enyo
Eris
Gynaecothoenas
Homados
Hysminai
Ioke
Keres
Kratos
Kydoimos
Ma
Machai
Nike
Palioxis
Pallas
Perses
Phobos
Phonoi
Polemos
Proioxis
Chthonic deitiesPsychopomps
Charon
Hermes
Hermanubis
Thanatos
Angelos
Cabeiri
Hades / Pluto
Hecate
Hypnos
Keres
Lampad
Macaria
Melino 
Persephone
Zagreus
Health deities
Aceso
Aegle
Artemis
Apollo
Asclepius
Chiron
Darrhon
Eileithyia
Epione
Hebe
Hygieia
Iaso
Paean
Panacea
Telesphorus
Sleep deities
Empusa
Epiales
Hypnos
Pasithea
Oneiroi
Messenger deities
Angelia
Arke
Hermes
Iris
Trickster deities
Apate
Dolos
Hermes
Momus
Magic deities
Circe
Hecate
Hermes Trismegistus
Pasipha 
Other major deities
Azone
Cybele
Eileithyia
The Erinyes (Furies)
Harmonia
The Muses
Nemesis
Pan
Pegasus
Unknown God
Zelus
Heroes / heroines
Abderus
Achilles
Actaeon
Adonis
Aeneas
Ajax the Great
Ajax the Lesser
Akademos
Amphiaraus
Amphitryon
Antilochus
Atalanta
Autolycus
Bellerophon
Bouzyges
Cadmus
Calydonian hunters
Chrysippus
Cyamites
Daedalus
Diomedes
Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces)
Echetlus
Eleusis
Erechtheus
Eunostus
Ganymede
Hector
Heracles
Icarus
Iolaus
Jason and the Argonauts
Meleager
Narcissus
Nestor
Odysseus
Oedipus
Orpheus
Otrera
Pandion
Peleus
Pelops
Penthesilea
Perseus
Seven against Thebes
Theseus
Triptolemus
Oracles / seers
Aesacus
Aleuas
Amphiaraus
Amphilochus
Ampyx
Anius
Asbolus
Bakis
Branchus
Calchas
Carnus
Carya
Cassandra
Elatus
Ennomus
Epimenides
Halitherses
Helenus
Iamus
Idmon
Manto
Melampus
Mopsus
Munichus
Phineus
Polyeidos
Polypheides
Pythia
Sibyls
Cimmerian
Cumaean
Delphic
Erythraean
Hellespontine
Libyan
Persian
Phrygian
Samian
Telemus
Theiodamas
Theoclymenus
Tiresias
Other  mortals
Aegeus
Aegisthus
Agamemnon
Andromache
Andromeda
Antigone
Augeas
Briseis
Cassiopeia
Creon of Thebes
Chryseis
Chrysothemis
Clytemnestra
Damocles
Deidamia of Scyros
Deucalion
Electra
Eteocles
Europa
Gordias
Hecuba
Helen of Troy
Hellen
The Heracleidae
Hermione
Hippolyta
Io
Iphigenia
Ismene
Jocasta
Laius
Lycaon
The Maenads
Memnon
Menelaus
Midas
Minos
Myrrha
Neoptolemus
Niobe
Orestes
Paris
Patroclus
Penelope
Phoenix
Polybus of Corinth
Polynices
Priam
Pylades
Pyrrha
Telemachus
Troilus
UnderworldEntrances to  the underworldRivers
Acheron
Cocytus
Eridanos
Lethe
Phlegethon
Styx
Lakes/swamps
Acherusia
Avernus Lake
Lerna Lake
Caves
Cave at Cape Matapan
Cave at Lake Avernus
Cave at Heraclea Pontica
Charoniums
Charonium at Aornum
Charonium at Acharaca
Ploutonion
Ploutonion at Acharaca
Ploutonion at Eleusis
Ploutonion at Hierapolis
Places
Elysium
Erebus
Fields of Asphodel
Isles of the Blessed
Mourning Fields
Tartarus
Judges
Aeacus
Minos
Rhadamanthus
Guards
Campe
Cerberus
Residents
Anticlea
Dana des
Eurydice
Ixion
Ocnus
Salmoneus
Shades
Sisyphus
Tantalus
Tiresias
Titans
Tityos
Visitors
Dionysus
Heracles
Hermes
Odysseus
Orpheus
Pirithous
Psyche
Theseus
Symbols/objects
Bident
Cap of invisibility
Charon's obol
Animals, daemons, and spirits
Ascalaphus
Ceuthonymus
Eurynomos
Menoetius
MythicalBeingsLists
Greek mythological creatures
Greek mythological figures
List of minor Greek mythological figures
Metamorphoses in Greek mythology
Minor spirits
Daemon
Agathodaemon
Cacodaemon
Eudaemon
Nymph
Satyr
Beasts / creatures
Centaur
Centaurides
Ichthyocentaur
Cyclops
Dragon
Drakaina
Echidna
Giant
Hecatonchires
Gorgon
Harpy
Hippocampus
Horses of Helios
Lamia
Phoenix
Python
Siren
Scylla and Charybdis
Sphinx
Typhon
Captured / slain by  heroes
Calydonian boar
Cerberus
Cerynian Hind
Chimera
Cretan Bull
Crommyonian Sow
Erymanthian boar
Khalkotauroi
Lernaean Hydra
Mares of Diomedes
Medusa
Minotaur
Nemean lion
Orthrus
Polyphemus
Stymphalian birds
Talos
Teumessian fox
Tribes
Amazons
Anthropophagi
Bebryces
Curetes
Dactyls
Gargareans
Halizones
Korybantes
Lapiths
Lotus-eaters
Myrmidons
Pygmies
Spartoi
Telchines
Places / Realms
Aethiopia
Ara
Colchis
Erytheia
Hyperborea
Libya
Nysa
Ogygia
Panchaia
Scheria
Scythia
Tartessos
Themiscyra
Events
Acis and Galatea
Calydonian boar hunt
Eros and Psyche
Judgment of Paris
Labours of Heracles
Returns from Troy
Wars
Amazonomachy
Attic War
Centauromachy
Gigantomachy
Indian War
Theomachy
Titanomachy
Trojan War
Things
Adamant
Aegis
Ambrosia
Apple of Discord
Argo
Dragon's teeth
Diipetes
Eidolon
Galatea
Girdle of Aphrodite
Golden apple
Golden Fleece
Gordian knot
Harpe
Ichor
Labyrinth
Language of the birds
Lotus tree
Milk of Hera
Moly
Necklace of Harmonia
Orichalcum
Palladium
Panacea
Pandora's box
Petasos (Winged helmet)
Phaeacian ships
Philosopher's stone
Shield of Achilles
Shirt of Nessus
Sword of Damocles
Talaria
Thunderbolt
Thyrsus
Trident of Poseidon
Trojan Horse
Winnowing Oar
Wheel of fire
Symbols
Caduceus
Cornucopia
Gorgoneion
Kantharos
Labrys
Orphic egg
Ouroboros
Owl of Athena
Rod of Asclepius
Moderntreatments
Classical mythology in western art and literature
Classicism
Classics
Greek mythology in popular culture
Modern understanding of Greek mythology
vteLists of mythological figuresBy geography
Afghan
African
Albanian
Arabian
Armenian
Australian Aboriginal
Aztec
Balkan
Basque
Batak
Canaanite
Catalan
Celtic
List
Chahta
Chinese
Efik
Egyptian
Index
List
Elamite
Estonian
Etruscan
Finnish
Georgian
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Greek
Mycenaean
Guanche
Haudenosaunee
Hawaiian
Hebridean
Indian-origin religions
Hindu
List
Rigvedic
Buddhist
Japan
Jain
List
Meitei
List
Hittite
Hungarian
Hurrian
Indonesian
Inuit
Irish
Japanese
Komi
Korean
Lakota
Lithuanian
M ori
M ohi
Maya
Mesopotamian
Micronesian
Muskogee
Myanmar
Native American
Ossetian
Persian
Philippine
Pur pecha
Roman
Sami
Samoan
Slavic
Turkic
Tuvaluan
Ugaritic
Vainakh
Yoruba
By association
Agriculture
Art
Beauty
Chaos
Creator
Death
Earth
God
Goddess
List
Fate and Time
Fertility
Fire
Fortune
Health
Household
Hunting
King of the gods
Knowledge
Light
Liminal
Love and Lust
Moon
List
Nations
Nature
Night
Psychopomp
Rain
Resurrection
Sky
Smithing
Sun
List
Thunder
Tree
Trickery
List
Tutelary
Vegetation
War
Water
Weather
Wind
 Portal
 Category
vteMetamorphoses in Greek mythologyAnimalsAvian
Abas
Acanthis
Acanthus
Acmon
A don
Aegolius
Aegypius
A tos
Aesacus
Agrius and Oreius
Agron
Alcander
Alcyone
Alcyone and Ceyx
Alcyonides
Alectryon
Anthus
Antigone
Argus
Arne Sithonis
Artemiche
Ascalaphus
Asteria
Autonous
Botres
Bulis
Byssa
Caeneus
Celeus
Cerberus
Chelidon
Cinyras
Clinis
Combe
Corone
Ctesylla
Cycnus of Aetolia
Cycnus of Ares
Cycnus of Colonae
Cycnus of Liguria
Daedalion
Erinoma
Erodius
Eumelus
Gerana
Harpalyce
Harpasus
Harpe
Hierax
Hippodamia
Hyperippe
Hyria
Ictinus
Idas
Ino
Itys
Iynx
Laius
Lelante
Lycius
Lycus
Megaletor
Meleagrids
Memnonides
Meropis
Merops
Minyades
Munichus
Neophron
Nisus
Nyctaea
Nyctimene
Oenoe
Oenotropae
Ortygius
Pandareus
Pelia
Perdix
Periphas
Peristera
Picus
Pierides
Phene
Philaeus
Philomela
Pleiades
Polyphonte
Polytechnus
Procne
Rhexenor
Schoeneus
Scylla
Tereus
Timandra
Non-avian
Abas
Actaeon
Arachne
Arcas
Arge
Aristaeus
Ascalabus
Atalanta
Cadmus
Calchus
Callisto
Cephissus
Cerambus
Cercopes
Chelone
Circe
Cynosura
Galanthis
Gale
Harmonia
Hecuba
Helice
Hippomenes
Io
Lycaon
Lycian peasants
Lyncus
Melanippe
Melian nymphs
Melissa
Minyades
Myia
Myrmex
Na s
Nerites
Ocyrhoe
Odysseus
Phalanx
Phineus
Phoenice
Pompilus
Taygete
Theophane
Tiresias
Titanis
Tithonus
Tyrrhenian pirates
Aethalides
Alcimedon
Dictys
Epopeus
Melas
Medon
Opheltes
Base appearance
Achilles
Antigone
Charybdis
Lamia
Medusa
Midas
Mulberry fruit
Scylla
Sirens
White raven
Humanoids
Arne
Calliste
Cymodoce
Cephalus' wife
Galatea
Leleges
Myrmidons
Nephele
Spartoi
Weasel
Inanimate objects
Aconteus
Aglaurus
Alcmene
Anaxarete
Ariadne
Arsinoe
Aspalis
Battus
Britomartis
Calydon
Cercopes
Cragaleus
Daphnis
Iodame
Laelaps
Lethaea
Lyco and Orphe
Olenus
Pallas
Pandareus
Phineus
Polydectes
Proetus
Propoetides
Pyrrhus
Teumessian fox
Wolf
Landforms
Achelous
Acheron
Acis
Aea
Alope
Alpheus
Arethusa
Asteria
Atlas
Aura
Byblis
Calliste
Castalia
Chione
Cleite
Cyane
Dirce
Haemus
Lichas
Lilaeus
Manto
Marsyas
Menippe and Metioche
Niobe
Perimele
Pirene
Pyramus and Thisbe
Rhodope
Rhodopis
Sangas
Selemnus
Sybaris
Opposite sex
Caeneus
Hermaphroditus
Iphis
Leucippus
Salmacis
Siproites
Sithon
Tiresias
Plants
Adonis
Agdistis
Ajax
Amaracus
Ambrosia
Ampelus
Anethus
Attis
Baucis and Philemon
Calamus
Carpus
Carya
Cissus
Clytie
Crocus
Cyparissus
Daphne
Diopatra
Dryope
Elaea
Elate
Eteocleides
Heliades
Aegle
Dioxippe
Lampetia
Merope
Phaethusa
Phoebe
Hesperides
Aegle
Erytheia
Hyacinthus
Leuce
Leucothoe
Libanus
Lotis
Lycurgus
Mecon
Melus
Messapians
Milk
Minthe
Myrice
Myrina
Myrsine
Narcissus
Oechalides
Philyra
Phyllis
Picolous
Pitys
Platanus
Psalacantha
Saliva
Side
Smilax
Smyrna
Spear
Syceus
Syrinx
Voluntary
Greek gods
Kobalos
Mestra
Periclymenus
Other
Cumaean Sibyl
Echo
Hyades
Hylas
Milk
Pleiades
Metamorphoses
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Greek_mythological_figures&oldid=1147716835"