Immigration to the United States in violation of US law
United States citizenship and immigration
Immigration
Immigration to the United States
Emigration from the United States
Immigration policy of the United States
Effects of immigration to the United States
Permanent Residency (Green Card)
Refugees and asylum
Diversity Immigrant Visa
Illegal immigrants
Deportation of Americans from the United States
Citizenship
Oath of Allegiance
Birthright citizenship
U.S. citizens / nationals
Citizenship test
Passports
Relinquishment of nationality
Honorary citizenship
Agencies
USCIS
ICE
Legislation
United States nationality law
History
Colonial nationality law
Naturalization Act of 1790
Civil Rights Act of 1866
United States v. Wong Kim Ark
Indian Citizenship Act
Nationality Act of 1940
Relevant legislation
Citizenship Clause
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 / 1965
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
Immigration Act of 1990
Child Citizenship Act of 2000
 United States portalvte
 An immigrant attempting to cross the US-Mexico border illegally by climbing over the border fence in Brownsville, Texas
Illegal immigration to the United States is the process of migrating into the United States in violation of US immigration laws. This can include foreign nationals (aliens) who have entered the United States unlawfully,[1][2] as well as those who lawfully entered but then remained after the expiration of their visas, parole, TPS, etc. Illegal immigration has been a matter of intense debate in the United States since the 1980s.[citation needed]
The illegal immigrant population of the United States peaked by 2007, when it was at 12.2 million and 4% of the total U.S. population.[3][4] Estimates in 2016 put the number of unauthorized immigrants at 10.7 million, representing 3.3% of the total U.S. population.[3] Since the Great Recession, more illegal immigrants have left the United States than entered it, and illegal border crossings were at the lowest in decades until 2021, when a record of 1.7 million people were caught trying to cross the southern border illegally.[5][6][7][8][9] Since 2007, visa overstays have accounted for a larger share of the growth in the illegal immigrant population than illegal border crossings,[10] which have declined considerably from 2000 to 2018.[11] In 2012, 52% of unauthorized immigrants were from Mexico, 15% from Central America, 12% from Asia, 6% from South America, 5% from the Caribbean, and another 5% from Europe and Canada.[12] As of 2016, approximately two-thirds of unauthorized adult immigrants had lived in the U.S. for at least a decade.[3]
Opponents of illegal immigration argue that people who enter the United States illegally are criminals, as well as social and economic burdens on law-abiding natives. Opponents also argue that illegal immigrants who enter the United States illegally should be deported instead of being awarded with U.S. citizenship and social services.[13] Some argue that illegal immigrants should instead enter the United States lawfully through legal immigration.[14][15]
Research shows that illegal immigrants increase the size of the U.S. economy, contribute to economic growth, enhance the welfare of natives, contribute more in tax revenue than they collect, reduce American firms' incentives to offshore jobs and import foreign-produced goods, and benefit consumers by reducing the prices of goods and services.[16][17][18][19] Economists estimate that legalization of the illegal immigrant population would increase the immigrants' earnings and consumption considerably, and increase U.S. gross domestic product.[20][21][22][23] There is scholarly consensus that illegal immigrants commit less crime than natives.[24][25] Sanctuary cities which adopt policies designed to avoid prosecuting people solely for being in the country illegally have no statistically meaningful impact on crime.[26][27] Research suggests that immigration enforcement has no impact on crime rates.[26][28][29]
Definitions
The categories of foreign-born people in the United States are:
U.S. citizens born outside the United States who are naturalized or citizens by adoption[30]
Foreign-born non-citizens with current status to reside and/or work in the U.S. (documented)[31]
Foreign-born non-citizens without current status to reside and/or work in the U.S. (illegal)
Foreign-born non-citizens who are prohibited from entry (illegal and also inadmissible)[32]
The latter two constitute illegal immigrants: as they have no legal documentation to entitle them to be in the U.S., they are also referred to as undocumented immigrants or undocumented Americans.[33][34]
Non-citizen residence can be or become illegal in one of four ways: by unauthorized entry, by failure of the employer to pay worker documentation fees, by staying beyond the expiration date of a visa or other authorization, or by violating the terms of legal entry.[35][failed verification][36][failed verification]
History
Further information: History of immigration to the United States
See also: List of United States immigration laws
Rigorous immigration controls were first enacted with the Page Act of 1875, banning Chinese women, and the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, expanded to all Chinese immigrants.[37]
Supreme Court decisions
Since the late 19th century, various Supreme Court rulings established the Constitutional rights of illegal immigrants. In Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886), the court ruled that under the Fourteenth Amendment, all people, regardless of "race, of color, or of nationality" have the right to due process and equal protection under the law.[38] A similar ruling of Wong Wing v. U.S. (1896) stated that all persons within the territory of the United States are afforded equal protections under the Fifth Amendment and Sixth Amendment.[39]
A 1904 court decision defined any alien as lacking Constitutional rights when not within the United States.[a]
Legislation
The Naturalization Act of 1906, required immigrants to learn English in order to become citizens. The Immigration Act of 1917 defined aliens with a long list of undesirables, including most Asians.[40] The U.S. had otherwise nearly open borders until the early 20th century,[41][42][43] with only 1% rejected from 1890 to 1924, usually because they failed the mental or health exam.[44][45] While immigration laws during those years were loose, laws limiting naturalization to those of "white" and "African" meant many other immigrants had difficulty acquiring citizenship. These regulations immediately created problems of interpretation   the contentious question of who was and was not "white" vexed even the officials charged with enforcing the law and led to significant criticism. The Union of American Hebrew Congregations noted that under the standing interpretation that Turks, Syrians, Palestinians and Jews were not white, "even Jesus of Nazareth himself" would be excluded from citizenship. As a result, judges and immigration officials often admitted and naturalized technically ineligible people as a form of protest against the laws.[46][47]
The Immigration Act of 1924 established visa requirements and enacted quotas for immigrants from specific countries, especially with low quotas for Southern and Eastern Europeans,.[44] It especially affected Italians and Jews.[48]  It also prohibited virtually all Asians from immigrating to America.[49] 
By 1940, administrative and legislative action had loosened racial restrictions on naturalization of immigrants, including a ruling that Mexicans were considered white for immigration and naturalization purposes, and a law permitting the naturalization of "descendants of races indigenous to the Western Hemisphere."[47] The quotas were eased in the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952.
The decisive opening came in 1965, a year after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawed discrimination based on race or national origin.[50] The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 abolished the quota system. The 1965 Act also established several new limits to which immigrants would be admissible for permanent residence in the United States.[51] A 1990 act increased the annual immigrant limit to 675,000 per year.
In 1996, Congress debated two immigration bills - one focused on limiting legal immigration, and another focused on illegal immigration.[52] The legal immigration reform bills failed to pass, while the illegal immigration bill was passed in the form of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996. President Bill Clinton signed the Act into law and it became effective on April 1, 1997. The key components of the Act included increasing the number of border agents, increasing penalties on those who assisted illegal immigrants into the United States, creating a 10-year re-entry ban on those who had been deported after living in the U.S. illegally for over one year, and expanding the list of crimes that any immigrant (regardless of legal status) could be deported for.
Border controls
As early as 1904, mounted border watchmen were employed by the U.S. Immigration Service to prevent illegal southern border crossings.[53] Texas Rangers were also often employed along the Texas border with Mexico.[54]
Increased border militarization in the United States had the unintended consequence of increasing illegal immigration to the United States, as temporary undocumented immigrants who entered the United States seasonally for work opted to stay permanently in the United States and bring their families once it became harder to move across the border regularly.[55] The U.S. Border Patrol was also officially created in 1924, with its duties in 1925 broadened to include guarding the sea coast. Illegal entry into the United States became a particular problem during Prohibition, when bootleggers and smugglers would illegally enter the country to transport alcohol.[53]
 Video of illegal immigrants crossing interstate 5 on July 19, 1991, immigrants congregate on north side of the Tijuana River levy, immigrants cross Tijuana River with plastic bags over legs, July 20, 1991 - Video by Carmen Castro U.S. Customs and Border Protection Office of Public Affairs - Visual Communications Division
The debate over illegal immigration has continued amongst the fear of potential terrorist attacks in the wake of the September 11 attacks in 2001 and the lack of an effective Mexico United States barrier. President Donald Trump enacted a travel ban from seven Muslim-majority countries, which was struck down as unconstitutional and replaced by a narrower version drafted by the Justice Department, which Trump described as "watered down, politically correct" and which was subsequently upheld by the Supreme Court.[56] During his successful election campaign, Trump promised to make Mexico pay for a new border wall.[citation needed] As of December 2019[update], Mexican government has refused to do so.[citation needed] The federal government entered a partial shutdown from December 22, 2018, to January 25, 2019 in a standoff over Trump's demand for $5.7 billion in funding for the wall.[57]
Profile and demographics
Main article: Illegal immigrant population of the United StatesThis section needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (August 2017)
In 2012, an estimated 14 million people live in families in which the head of household or the spouse is in the United States without authorization.[58] Illegal immigrants arriving recently before 2012 tend to be better educated than those who have been in the country a decade or more. A quarter of all immigrants who have arrived in recently before 2012 have at least some college education. Nonetheless, illegal immigrants as a group tend to be less educated than other sections of the U.S. population: 49 percent haven't completed high school, compared with 9 percent of native-born Americans and 25 percent of legal immigrants.[58]
Illegal immigrants work in many sectors of the U.S. economy. Illegal immigrants have lower incomes than both legal immigrants and native-born Americans, but earnings do increase somewhat the longer an individual is in the country.[58]
Breakdown by state
As of 2014[update],[59] the following data table shows a spread of distribution of locations where illegal immigrants reside by state.
State of residence: January 2014
State of residence
Estimated population in January
Percent of total
All states
12,120,000
100
California
2,900,000
24
Texas
1,920,000
16
Florida
760,000
6
New York
640,000
5
Illinois
550,000
5
New Jersey
480,000
4
Georgia
430,000
4
North Carolina
400,000
3
Arizona
370,000
3
Washington
290,000
2
Other states
3,370,000
28
Population
From 2005 to 2009, the number of people entering the U.S. illegally every year declined from a yearly average of 850,000 in the early 2000s to 300,000 in 2009, according to the Pew Hispanic Center.[60] The most recent estimates put the number of unauthorized immigrants at 11 million in 2015, representing 3.4% of the total U.S. population.[3] The population of unauthorized immigrants peaked in 2007, when it was estimated at 12.2 million and 4% of the total U.S. population.[3][4] As of 2014, unauthorized immigrant adults had lived in the U.S. for a median of 13.6 years, with approximately two-thirds having lived in the U.S. for at least a decade.[3] Pew Research estimated in 2017 that there were over seven million illegal immigrants in the U.S. workforce.[61]
 U.S. illegal immigrant apprehensions from U.S. Border Patrol as of 2017.
Narrowing the discussion to only Mexican nationals, a 2015 study performed by demographers of the University of Texas at San Antonio and the University of New Hampshire found that immigration from Mexico; both legal and illegal, peaked in 2003 and that from the period between 2003 and 2007 to the period of 2008 to 2012, immigration from Mexico decreased 57%. The dean of the College of Public Policy of the University of Texas at San Antonio, Rogelio Saenz, states that lower birth rates and the growing economy in Mexico slowed emigration, creating more jobs for Mexicans. Saenz also states that Mexican immigrants are no longer coming to find jobs but to flee from violence, noting that the majority of those escaping crime "are far more likely to be naturalized U.S. citizens".[62]
According to a 2017 National Bureau of Economic Research paper, "The number of undocumented immigrants has declined in absolute terms, while the overall population of low-skilled, foreign-born workers has remained stable. ... because major source countries for U.S. immigration are now seeing and will continue to see weak growth of the labor supply relative to the United States, future immigration rates of young, low-skilled workers appear unlikely to rebound, whether or not U.S. immigration policies tighten further."[63]
Children
See also: DREAM Act
The Pew Hispanic Center determined that according to an analysis of Census Bureau data about 8 percent of children born in the United States in 2008 about 340,000 were offspring of illegal immigrants. (The report classifies a child as offspring of illegal immigrants if either parent is unauthorized.) In total, 4 million U.S.-born children of illegal immigrant parents resided in this country in 2009.[64] These infants are, according to the longstanding administrative interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, United States citizens from birth.  Congress has never legislated, nor the Supreme Court specifically ruled on whether babies born to visiting foreign nationals are eligible for automatic U.S. Citizenship.  These children are sometimes referred to as anchor babies because of the belief that the mother gave birth in the United States as a way to anchor their family in the U.S. The provisions of the 1996 immigration law mean that an undocumented parent of a citizen child who entered the country without permission ("illegal entry") would need to leave the United States and wait a number of years before they would be able to apply for a visa to return to the U.S. or gain legal residency on the basis of family reunification, while undocumented parents who legally entered the United States (for example overstaying a visa) can in some cases be sponsored by their adult citizen child for legal residency without necessarily having to leave the country. Additionally, households headed by an undocumented parent are not eligible for many public assistance programs (ex. not eligible for TANF or temporary cash assistance to families with children in extreme poverty, "Obamacare" subsidies for health insurance or expanded Medicaid to working-age low-income adults, public housing, Section 8 housing voucher program) regardless of whether their child is a United States citizen or not, with some exceptions (Medicaid/SCHIP for the U.S. citizen child, SNAP/"foodstamps" on behalf of a U.S. citizen child, the temporarily expanded child-tax credit in 2021 2022, as well as some state and city programs specifically designed to include undocumented residents and their families) [65]
Organized migrant caravans
Main article: Central American migrant caravans
For several years, Pueblo Sin Fronteras, which means "People Without Borders" has organized an annual part-protest, part-mass migration march, from Honduras, through Mexico, to the United States border, where asylum in the United States is requested.[66] In April 2018, the annual "Stations of the Cross Caravan" saw 1,000 Central Americans trying to reach the United States, prompting President Trump to deem it a threat to national security and announce plans to send the national guard to protect the U.S. border.[67] In October 2018, a second caravan of the year left the city of San Pedro Sula the day after U.S. vice-president, Mike Pence, urged the presidents of Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala to persuade their citizens to stay home.[68]
2011 2016 surge in unaccompanied minors from Central America
Main article: 2014 American immigration crisis
Over the period 2011 2016, U.S. Border Patrol apprehended 178,825 unaccompanied minors from El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala.[69] The provisions of the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008, which specifies safe repatriation of unaccompanied children (other than those trafficked for sex or forced labor) from countries which do not have a common border with the United States, such as the nations of Central America other than Mexico, made expeditious deportation of the large number of children from Central America who came to the United States in 2014 difficult and expensive, prompting a call by President Barack Obama for an emergency appropriation of $4 billion[70] and resulting in discussions by the Department of Justice and Congress of how to interpret or revise the law in order to expedite handling large numbers of children under the act.[71]
A 2016 study found that Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), which allows unauthorized immigrants who migrated to the United States before their 16th birthday and prior to June 2007 to temporarily stay, did not significantly impact the number of apprehensions of unaccompanied minors from Central America.[72] Rather, the study stated, "the 2008 Williams Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act, along with violence in the originating countries and economic conditions in both the countries of origin and the United States, emerge as some of the key determinants of the recent surge in unaccompanied minors apprehended along the southwest U.S.-Mexico border."[72] According to a 2015 report by the Government Accountability Office, the primary drivers of the surge "were crime and lack of economic opportunity at home. Other reasons included education concerns, desire to rejoin family and aggressive recruiting by smugglers."[73] A 2017 Center for Global Development study stated that violence was the primary driver behind the surge in unaccompanied Central American minors to the United States: an additional 10 homicides in Central America made 6 unaccompanied children flee to the U.S.[74] The widespread promulgation of false "permiso" rumors by human smugglers, as well as migrant perception of the Obama administration's immigration policies, also played a part in the increase.[75][76]
2018 family separation policy
Main article: Trump administration family separation policy
In April 2018, then-attorney general of the Trump administration Jeff Sessions announced a family separation policy regarding migrants crossing the U.S. southern border without a visa. Migrants and accompanying family members who had entered the country who were alleged to have entered illegally and were apprehended or turned themselves in to Border Control agents were charged with criminal entry. If these family units had children, they were separated, with adults placed in detention centers to await immigration proceedings and the children in separate facilities or with a relative already in the U.S.[77][78] There was widespread condemnation of this policy including that of notable evangelical Christian leaders such as Franklin Graham.[79][80]
Countries of origin
According to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, the countries of origin for the largest numbers of illegal immigrants are as follows (latest of 2017):[59]
Country of origin
Raw number
Percent of total
Mexico
6,640,000
55
El Salvador
700,000
6
Guatemala
640,000
5
India
430,000
4
Honduras
400,000
3
Philippines
360,000
3
China
270,000
2
Korea
250,000
2
Vietnam
200,000
2
Dominican Republic
180,000
1
Other
2,050,000
17
According to the Migration Policy Institute, Mexicans represented 53% of the illegal immigrant population.[81] The next largest percentages were from Asia (16%), El Salvador (6%), and Guatemala (5%).
The Urban Institute also estimates "between 65,000 and 75,000 Canadians currently live illegally in the United States."[82]
Trends
 Both the population of unauthorized immigrants in the U.S. and southwestern border apprehensions have declined significantly over the past decade.[83][84]
In 2017, illegal border crossing arrests hit a 46-year low, and were down 25% from the previous year.[85] NPR stated that immigrants may be less likely to attempt to enter the U.S. illegally because of President Trump's stance on illegal immigration.[86][87] The majority of illegal immigrants come from Mexico. Studies have shown that 40 million foreign born residents live in the U.S. 11.7 million of that population is illegal.[88] During the 1950s, there were 45,000 documented immigrants from Central America. In the 1960s, this number more than doubled to 100,000. In the decade after, it increased to 134,000.[89] In 2019, after being threatened with punitive tariffs, Mexico agreed to a deal with the U.S. to better stem the flow of migrants passing through the country to enter the U.S.[90] In September 2019, Mexican foreign minister Marcelo Ebrard stated that immigration to the U.S. through Mexico has decreased significantly, and that this trend is "irreversible. ... It is something that we think will be permanent. [91]
Illegal entry
Main article: Illegal entry  United States
There are an estimated half million illegal entries into the United States each year.[36][92] The Pew Hispanic Center estimated that 6 7 million immigrants came to the United States via illegal entry (the rest entering via legal visas allowing a limited stay, but then not leaving when their visa period ended).[36] Illegal border crossings have declined considerably from 2000, when 71,000 220,000 migrants were apprehended each month, to 2018 when 20,000 40,000 migrants were apprehended.[11]
A common means of border crossing is to hire people smugglers to help them across the border. Those operating on the U.S.-Mexico border are known informally as coyotajes (coyotes), and are often part of extensive criminal networks throughout Mexico.[92] Criminal gangs smuggling illegal immigrants from China are known as snakeheads, and charge as much as U.S.$70,000 per person, which immigrants often promise to pay with money they hope to earn in the United States.[93][94]
Visa overstay
A tourist or traveler is considered a "visa overstay" once he or she remains in the United States after the time of admission has expired. The time of admission varies greatly from traveler to traveler depending on the visa class into which they were admitted. According to Pew, between 4 and 5.5 million foreigners entered the United States with a legal visa, accounting for between 33 and 48% of the total unauthorized migrant population.[36] Visa overstays tend to be somewhat more educated and better off financially than those who entered the country illegally.[95] In most instances, overstaying a visa is a civil "wrong" and not necessarily a crime, though the person is still subject to deportation for unlawful presence.[96]
To help track visa overstayers the U.S.-VISIT (United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology) program collects and retains biographic, travel, and biometric information, such as photographs and fingerprints, of foreign nationals seeking entry into the United States. It also requires electronic readable passports containing this information.
Visa overstayers mostly enter with tourist or business visas.[36] In 1994, more than half[97] of illegal immigrants were Visa overstayers whereas in 2006, about 45% of illegal immigrants were Visa overstayers.[98]
Those who leave the United States after overstaying their visa for more than 180 days but less than one year, leave and then attempt to apply for readmission will face a three-year ban which will not allow them to re-enter the U.S. for that period. Those who leave the United States after overstaying their visa for a period of one year or longer, leave and then attempt to apply for readmission will face a ten-year ban.[99]
Border Crossing Card violation
A smaller number of illegal immigrants entered the United States legally using the Border Crossing Card, a card that authorizes border crossings into the U.S. for a set amount of time. Border Crossing Card entry accounts for the vast majority of all registered non-immigrant entry into the United States 148 million out of 179 million total but there is little hard data as to how much of the illegal immigrant population entered in this way. The Pew Hispanic Center estimates the number at around 250,000 500,000.[36]
In the workforce
Illegal immigrants within the workforce are extremely vulnerable due to their status. Being illegal makes these individuals susceptible to exploitation by employers as they are more willing to work through bad conditions and low income jobs consequently making themselves vulnerable to abuse.[100] Most illegal migrants end up being hired by U.S. employers who exploit the low-wage market produced through immigration. Typical jobs include: janitorial services, clothing production, and household work.[100]
Many illegal Latin American immigrants are inclined to the labor market because of the constraints they have with their job opportunities. This consequently forms an informal sector within the labor market. As a result, this attachment formulates an ethnic identity for this sector.[100]
Congress passed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) in 1996. This prevented federal, state, and local public benefits from flowing to illegal immigrants. It also required federal and state agencies to disclose if someone was illegal. Additionally, PRWORA prohibited states from giving professional licenses to those illegal.[101] Though PRWORA prevents public benefits from flowing to illegal immigrants, there are exceptions. Illegal immigrants are still entitled to medical assistance, immunizations, disaster relief, and k-12 education. Despite this, federal law still requires local and state governments to deny benefits to those illegal.[101] The implementation of PRWORA demonstrated the shift towards personal responsibility over "public dependency."[102] There were about eight million undocumented workers in the United States in 2010. These workers were 5% of America's workforce.[101]
Causes
Main article: Illegal immigration  Causes
There are however numerous incentives which draw foreigners to the U.S. Most illegal immigrants who come to America come for better opportunities for employment, a greater degree of freedom, avoidance of political oppression, freedom from violence, famine, and family reunification.[103][104][74][105][106]
International polls by the Gallup organization from 2013 to 2016 in 156 foreign countries found that about 147 million adults would, if they could, move to the U.S., making it the most-desired destination country for potential migrants worldwide, followed by Germany and Canada.[107]
Causes by region
In general, illegal immigrants from Mexico and Central America come to the US as they flee from insecurity and violence in their own country (i.e. forced recruitment in gangs).[108] or in search for better economic opportunities.[109] However, it sometimes also occurs due to political oppression.[103][better source needed] From Asia, they come for economic reasons but some come involuntarily as sex slaves or indentured servants.[103][better source needed] From Sub-Saharan Africa, the majority come for economic activities.[103][better source needed] From Eastern Europe, they primarily come for economic activities and to rejoin family already in the United States. Like other regions, there are also some who come involuntarily as part of the sex industry.[103][better source needed]
Economic incentives
Economic reasons are one motivation for people to illegally immigrate to the United States.[110][111] United States employers hire illegal immigrants at wages substantially higher than they could earn in their native countries.[110] A study of illegal immigrants from Mexico in the 1978 harvest season in Oregon showed that they earned six times what they could have earned in Mexico, and even after deducting the costs of the seasonal migration and the additional expense of living in the United States, their net U.S. earnings were three times their Mexican alternative.[111] In the 1960s and early 70s, Mexico's high fertility rate caused a large increase in population. While Mexican population growth has slowed, the large numbers of people born in the 1960s and 70s are now of working age looking for jobs.[111]
According to Judith Gans of the University of Arizona, United States employers are pushed to hire illegal immigrants for three main reasons:[110]
Global economic change. Global economic change is one cause for illegal immigration because information and transportation technologies now foster internationalized production, distribution and consumption, and labor. This has encouraged many countries to open their economies to outside investment, then increasing the number of low-skilled workers participating in global labor markets and making low-skilled labor markets all more competitive. This and the fact that developed countries have shifted from manufacturing to knowledge-based economies, have realigned economic activity around the world. Labor has become more international as individuals immigrate seeking work, despite governmental attempts to control this migration. Because the United States education system creates relatively few people who either lack a high school diploma or who hold PhDs, there is a shortage of workers needed to fulfill seasonal low-skilled jobs as well as certain high-skilled jobs. To fill these gaps, the United States immigration system attempts to compensate for these shortages by providing for temporary immigration by farm workers and seasonal low-skilled workers, and for permanent immigration by high-skilled workers.
A lack of legal immigration channels.
The ineffectiveness of current employer sanctions for illegal hiring. This allows immigrants who are in the country illegally to easily find jobs. There are three reasons for this ineffectiveness the absence of reliable mechanisms for verifying employment eligibility, inadequate funding of interior immigration enforcement, and the absence of political will due to labor needs to the United States economy. For example, it is unlawful to knowingly hire an illegal immigrant, but according to Judith Gans, there are no reliable mechanisms in place for employers to verify that the immigrants' papers are authentic.
Another reason for the large numbers of illegal immigrants present in the United States is the termination of the bracero program. This bi-national program between the U.S. and Mexico existed from 1942 to 1964 to supply qualified Mexican laborers as guest workers to harvest fruits and vegetables in the United States. During World War II, the program benefited the U.S. war effort by replacing citizens' labor in agriculture to serve as soldiers overseas. The program was designed to provide legal flows of qualified laborers to the U.S. Many Mexicans deemed unqualified for the program nonetheless immigrated illegally to the United States to work. In doing that they broke both U.S. and Mexican law.[112] Many workers that took advantage of the program became illegal residents, as they still had incentives to stay in the U.S. despite the fact that they were breaking the law. Although the bracero program had ended, the period still saw a massive spike in migrant population in the U.S.[113]
Channels for legal immigration
The United States immigration system provides channels for legal, permanent economic immigration, especially for high-skilled workers. For low-skilled workers, temporary or seasonal legal immigration is easier to acquire.[110] The United States immigration system rests on three pillars: family reunification, provision of scarce labor (as in agricultural and specific high-skilled worker sectors), and protecting American workers from competition with foreign workers.[110] The current system sets an overall limit of 675,000 permanent immigrants each year; this limit does not apply to spouses, unmarried minor children or parents of U.S. citizens.[114] Outside of this number for permanent immigrants, 480,000 visas are allotted for those under the family-preference rules and 140,000 are allocated for employment-related preferences.[114] The current system and low number of visas available make it difficult for low-skilled workers to legally and permanently enter the country to work, so illegal entry becomes the way immigrants respond to the lure of jobs with higher wages than what they would be able to find in their current country.[110]
Family reunification
See also: Family reunification and History of laws concerning immigration and naturalization in the United States
According to demographer Jeffery Passel of the Pew Hispanic Center, the flow of Mexicans to the U.S. has produced a "network effect" furthering immigration as Mexicans moved to join relatives already in the U.S.[115]
Further incentives
Lower costs of transportation, communication and information has facilitated illegal immigration. Mexican nationals, in particular, have a very low financial cost of immigration and can easily cross the border. Even if it requires more than one attempt, they have a very low probability of being detected and then deported once they have entered the country.[111]
Controversies
Mexican federal and state government assistance
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security and some advocacy groups have criticized a program of the government of the state of Yucat n and that of a federal Mexican agency directed to Mexicans migrating to and residing in the United States. They state that the assistance includes advice on how to get across the U.S. border illegally, where to find healthcare, enroll their children in public schools, and send money to Mexico. The Mexican federal government also issues identity cards to Mexicans living outside of Mexico.[116]
In 2005, the government of Yucat n produced a handbook and DVD about the risks and implications of crossing the U.S.-Mexico border. The guide told immigrants where to find health care, how to get their kids into U.S. schools, and how to send money home. Officials in Yucat n said the guide is a necessity to save lives, but some American groups accused the government of encouraging illegal immigration.[117]
In 2005, the Mexican government was criticized for distributing a comic book which offers tips to illegal emigrants to the United States.[118] That comic book recommends to illegal immigrants, once they have safely crossed the border, "Don't call attention to yourself. ... Avoid loud parties. ... Don't become involved in fights." The Mexican government defends the guide as an attempt to save lives. "It's kind of like illegal immigration for dummies," said the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies in Washington, Mark Krikorian. "Promoting safe illegal immigration is not the same as arguing against it". The comic book does state on its last page that the Mexican Government does not promote illegal crossing at all and only encourages visits to the U.S. with all required documentation.[118]
U.S. Marines scandal
In 2020, 24 U.S. Marines were discharged after an investigation over their alleged involvement in drug crimes and a human smuggling operation along the U.S.   Mexico border.[119] The investigation began when U.S. Border Patrol agents arrested two marines for transporting three illegal Mexican immigrants on July 3, 2019.[120] A few weeks later 16 marines and a U.S. Navy sailor were arrested on base during a battalion formation on July 25, 2019.[121][122] The last arrest occurred on December 2, 2019, when a marine was caught transporting two illegal Chinese immigrants near the border.[123] The ring leader of the human smuggling operation was identify as Francisco Saul Rojas-Hernandez. Some of the marines in court said Francisco Saul Rojas-Hernandez would pay them $1,000 per person that they helped transport.[124][125] 8 marines plead guilty, however some of the marines had their charges dropped after a judge said that the arrest of the 16 marines in front of a battalion formation was a violation of their rights. The U.S. Marine Corps still took administrative or judicial action against the 24 marines involved. According to 1st Lieutenant Cameron Edinburgh, one marine received a general discharge under honorable conditions, at least one marine received a dishonorable discharge, two received bad conduct discharges, and 19 received other than honorable discharges. The Navy sailor was also removed from service with a bad conduct discharge.[126]
Legal issues
 Department of Homeland Security's report of number of illegal immigrants removed or returned.[127]
Main articles: United States nationality law and List of United States immigration laws
See also: Criminal prosecution of illegal entry and re-entry under the Operation Streamline
Aliens can be classified as unlawfully present for one of three reasons: entering without authorization or inspection, staying beyond the authorized period after legal entry, or violating the terms of legal entry.[128]
Improper entry
Section 1325 in Title 8 of the United States Code, "Improper entry of alien", provides for a fine, imprisonment, or both for any non-citizen who:[129]
enters or attempts to enter the United States at any time or place other than as designated by immigration agents, or
eludes examination or inspection by immigration agents, or
attempts to enter or obtains entry to the United States by a willfully false or misleading representation or the willful concealment of a material fact.
Section "1325(a) is a regulatory offense, and thus knowledge of alienage is not an element."[1] The maximum prison term is 6 months for the first offense with a misdemeanor and 2 years for any subsequent offense with a felony. In addition to the above criminal fines and penalties, civil fines may also be imposed. Sections 1325(a) and 1326(a), however, do "not apply to an alien whom the Attorney General admits to the United States under section 1157 of this title."[2]
Visa overstay
Unlike illegal entry (which is a criminal offense in the United States), it is not a criminal offense for an alien to enter the United States legally and then overstay his or her visa.[130] A visa overstay is a civil violation dealt with through proceedings in immigration court.[130] A 2006 Pew Hispanic Center study showed that some 45% of unauthorized migrants entered the U.S. legally and then remained in the U.S. without authorization following the expiration of their visa.[131] A person who overstays a visa is subject only to the civil penalties of deportation or removal and restrictions for future applications for another U.S. visa; under provisions of Section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended by 1996 legislation, an alien who "voluntarily departs the United States after being unlawfully present for more than 180 consecutive days but less than 1 year" is subject to a three-year bar to readmission to the United States, and an alien who "departs (voluntarily or involuntarily) the United States after being unlawfully present for 1 consecutive year or more" is subject to a ten-year bar to readmission to the United States.[132]
Since 2007, visa overstays have accounted for a larger share of the growth in the illegal immigrant population than illegal border crossings.[10] In 2019, a Center for Migration Studies of New York study found that for the seventh consecutive year, the number of visa overstays significantly surpassed the number of unauthorized border crossings; "from 2016-2017, people who overstayed their visas accounted for 62 percent of the newly undocumented, while 38 percent had crossed a border illegally."[133] Some visa overstays occur unwittingly or inadvertently.[134] In other cases, visa-holders enter the United States without the intention to do so, but ultimately decide to do so due to extenuating circumstances, such as dangers in their home countries.[135]
Federal versus state role
The federal government has primary responsibility for immigration enforcement in the United States.[136][137]
In April 2010, Arizona passed SB 1070, at the time the broadest and strictest anti-illegal immigration bill in the United States.[138] and was challenged by the Department of Justice as encroaching on powers reserved by the United States Constitution to the Federal Government.[138] In July 2010, a federal district court issued a preliminary injunction affecting the most controversial parts of the law, including the section that required police officers to check a person's immigration status after a person had been involved in another act or situation which resulted in police activity.[139] The case came to the Supreme Court of the United States in Arizona v. United States (2012).  The Court unanimously sustained the law's central and most controversial requirement, requiring state law enforcement officials "to determine the immigration status of anyone they stop or arrest if they have reason to suspect that the individual might be in the country illegally" a clause called the "show me your papers" provision by opponents.[140] The Court, however, indicated that future legal challenges to the provision could still be pursued based on, for example, allegations of racial profiling in the use of the clause.[140] The Court also struck down as unconstitutional, by a 5 3 vote, provisions of the Arizona law making it a criminal offense for illegal immigrants to work or seek employment and permitting police to make warrantless arrests if they had probable cause to believe that the arrestee had done an act that would render him or her deportable under federal law"; and struck down as unconstitutional, by a 6 2 vote, a clause of the Arizona law that made it a state crime for immigrants to fail to register with the federal government.[140]
In 2016, Arizona reached a settlement with a number of immigrants rights organizations, including the National Immigration Law Center, overturning the part of the law providing for police to demand papers from persons they suspected of being illegally present in the United States. The practice had led to racial profiling of Latinos and other minorities.[141] The Los Angeles Times reported that the settlement "pulls the last set of teeth from what was once the nation's most fearsome immigration law."[141]
Employment
Illegal immigrants are generally not allowed to receive state or local public benefits, which includes professional licenses.[142] However, in 2013 the California State Legislature passed laws allowing illegal immigrants to obtain professional licenses. On February 1, 2014. Sergio C. Garcia became the first illegal immigrant to be admitted to the State Bar of California since 2008, when applicants were first required to list citizenship status on bar applications.[143]
E-Verify
 A map of U.S. states on E verify law. As of 2015, Pink states Requires E-Verify for most public employers, Blue states Requires E-Verify for some public contractors and subcontractors, and Yellow Requires E-Verify for all employers[144]
E-Verify is a United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) website that allows businesses to determine the eligibility of their employees, both U.S. and foreign citizens, to work in the United States. No federal law mandates use of E-Verify.
Research shows that E-Verify harms the labor market outcomes of illegal immigrants and improves the labor market outcomes of Mexican legal immigrants and U.S.-born Hispanics, but has no impact on labor market outcomes for non-Hispanic white Americans.[145] A 2016 study suggests that E-Verify reduces the number of illegal immigrants in states that have mandated use of E-Verify for all employers, and further notes that the program may deter illegal immigration to the United States in general.
Apprehension
 U.S. Border Patrol agents review documents of individuals suspected of attempted illegal entry in 2019
Federal law enforcement agencies, specifically U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), the United States Border Patrol (U.S.BP), and U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), enforce the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 (INA), and to some extent, the United States Armed Forces, state and local law enforcement agencies, and civilians and civilian groups guard the border.
At workplace
Before 2007, immigration authorities alerted employers of mismatches between reported employees' Social Security cards and the actual names of the card holders. In September 2007, a federal judge halted this practice of alerting employers of card mismatches.[146]
At times illegal hiring has not been prosecuted aggressively: between 1999 and 2003, according to The Washington Post, "work-site enforcement operations were scaled back 95 percent by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.[147] Major employers of illegal immigrants have included:
Wal-Mart: In 2005, Wal-Mart agreed to pay $11 million to settle a federal investigation that found hundreds of illegal immigrants were hired by Wal-Mart's cleaning contractors.[148]
Swift & Co.: In December 2006, in the largest such crackdown in American history, U.S. federal immigration authorities raided Swift & Co. meat-processing plants in six U.S. states, arresting about 1,300 illegal immigrant employees.[149]
Tyson Foods: This company was accused of actively importing illegal labor for its chicken packing plants; at trial, however, the jury acquitted the company after evidence was presented that Tyson went beyond mandated government requirements in demanding documentation for its employees.[150]
Gebbers Farms: In December 2009, U.S. immigration authorities forced this Brewster, Washington, farm known for its fruit orchards to fire more than 500 illegal workers, mostly immigrants from Mexico. Some were working with false social security cards and other false identification.[151]
 El Paso (top) and Ciudad Ju rez (bottom) seen from earth orbit; the Rio Grande is the thin line separating the two cities through the middle of the photograph.
Detention
Main article: Immigration detention in the United States
About 31,000 people who are not U.S. citizens are held in immigration detention on any given day,[152] including children, in over 200 detention centers, jails, and prisons nationwide.[153] The United States government held more than 300,000 people in immigration detention in 2007 while deciding whether to deport them.[154]
Deportation
Main article: Deportation and removal from the United States
Deportations of immigrants, which are also referred to as removals, may be issued when immigrants are found to be in violation of U.S. immigration laws. Deportations may be imposed on a person who is neither native-born nor a naturalized citizen of the United States.[155]
Deportation proceedings are also referred to as removal proceedings and are typically initiated by the Department of Homeland Security. The United States issues deportations for various reasons which include security, protection of resources, and protection of jobs.
Deportations from the United States increased by more than 60 percent from 2003 to 2008, with Mexicans accounting for nearly two-thirds of those deported.[156] Under the Obama administration, deportations have increased to record levels beyond the level reached by the George W. Bush administration with a projected 400,000 deportations in 2010, 10 percent above the deportation rate of 2008 and 25 percent above 2007.[157] Fiscal year 2011 saw 396,906 deportations, the largest number in the history of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement; of those, about 55% had been convicted of crimes or misdemeanors, including: 44,653 convicted of drug-related crimes, 35,927 convicted of driving under the influence, 5,848 convicted of sexual offenses, and 1,119 convicted of homicide.[158]
By the end of 2012, as many people had been deported during the first four years of the Obama presidency as were deported during the eight-year presidency of George W. Bush;[159] the number of deportations under Obama totalled 2.5 million by the end of 2015.[160]
The AEDPA and IIRIRA Acts of 1996
Two major pieces of legislation passed in 1996 had a significant effect on illegal immigration and deportations in the United States: the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA). These were introduced following the 1993 World Trade Center bombing and the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, both of which were terrorist attacks that claimed American lives. These two acts changed the way criminal cases of lawful permanent residents were handled, resulting in increased deportations from the United States.[161] Before the 1996 deportation laws, there were two steps that lawful permanent noncitizen residents who were convicted of crimes went through. The first step determined whether or not the person was deportable. The second step determined if that person should or shouldn't be deported. Before the 1996 deportation laws, the second step prevented many permanent residents from being deported by allowing for their cases to be reviewed in full before issuing deportations. External factors were taken into consideration such as the effect deportation would have on a person's family members and a person's connections with their country of origin. Under this system permanent residents were able to be relieved of deportation if their situation deemed it unnecessary. The 1996 laws however issued many deportations under the first step, without going through the second step, resulting in a great increase in deportations.[citation needed]
One significant change that resulted from the new laws was the definition of the term aggravated felony. Being convicted of a crime that is categorized as an aggravated felony results in mandatory detention and deportation. The new definition of aggravated felony includes crimes such as shoplifting, which would be a misdemeanor in many states. The new laws have categorized a much wider range of crimes as aggravated felonies. The effect of this has been a large increase in permanent residents facing mandatory deportation from the United States without the opportunity to plea for relief. The 1996 deportation laws have received a lot of criticism for their curtailing of residents' rights.[161]
The USA Patriot Act
The USA Patriot Act was passed seven weeks after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. The purpose of the act was to give the government more power to act upon suspicion of terrorist activity. The new governmental powers granted by this act included a significant expansion of the conditions in which illegal immigrants could be deported based on suspicion of terrorist activity. The act gave the government the power to deport individuals based not only on plots or acts of terrorism, but on affiliations with certain organizations. The Secretary of State designated specific organizations foreign terrorist organizations before the USA Patriot Act was implemented. Organizations on this list were deemed dangerous because they were actively involved in terrorist activity. The Patriot Act created a type of organization called designated organizations. The Secretary of State and Attorney General were given the power to designate any organization that supported terrorist activity on any level. The act also allows for deportation based on involvement in undesignated organizations that were deemed suspicious.[162]
Under the USA Patriot Act the Attorney General was granted the power to "certify" illegal immigrants that pose a threat to national security. Once an illegal immigrant is certified they must be taken into custody and face mandatory detention which will result in a criminal charge or release. The Patriot Act has been criticized for violating the Fifth Amendment right to due process. Under the Patriot Act, an illegal immigrant is not granted the opportunity for a hearing before given certification.[163]
Complications of birthright citizen children and illegal immigrant parents
Complications in deportation efforts ensue when parents are illegal immigrants, but their children are birthright citizens. Federal appellate courts have upheld the refusal by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to stay the deportation of illegal immigrants merely on the grounds that they have U.S.-citizen, minor children.[164] As of 2005, there were some 3.1 million United States citizen children living in families in which the head of the family or a spouse was unauthorized;[165] at least 13,000 children had one or both parents deported in the years 2005 2007.[165][failed verification]
DREAM Act
The DREAM Act (acronym for Development, Relief, and Education for Alien Minors) was an American legislative proposal for a multi-phase process for illegal immigrants in the United States that would first grant conditional residency and upon meeting further qualifications, permanent residency. The bill was first introduced in the Senate on August 1, 2001, and has since been reintroduced several times but did not pass. It was intended to stop the deportation of people who had arrived as children and had grown up in the U.S. The Act would give lawful permanent residency under certain conditions which include: good moral character, enrollment in a secondary or post-secondary education program, and having lived in the United States at least 5 years. Those in opposition of the DREAM Act believe that it encourages illegal immigration.[166]
Although the DREAM Act has not been enacted by federal legislation, a number of its provisions were implemented by a memorandum issued by Janet Napolitano of the Department of Homeland Security during the Obama administration. To be eligible for Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), one must show that they were under 31 years of age as of June 15, 2012[update]; that they came to the United States before their 16th birthday; that they have continuously resided in the United States from June 15, 2007, until the present; that they were physically present in the United States on June 15, 2012, and at the time they applied for DACA; that they were not authorized to be in the United States on June 15, 2012; that they are currently in school, have graduated or obtained a certificate of completion from high school, have obtained a general education development (GED) certificate, or are an honorably discharged veteran of the Coast Guard or Armed Forces of the United States; and that they have not been convicted of a felony, significant misdemeanor, three or more other misdemeanors, and do not otherwise pose a threat to national security or public safety.[167]
Deportation trends
 United States immigration enforcement actions, 1995 2015[clarification needed]
There have been two major periods of mass deportations in U.S. history. In the Mexican Repatriation of the 1930s, through mass deportations and forced migration, an estimated 500,000 Mexicans and Mexican Americans were deported or coerced into emigrating, in what Mae Ngai, an immigration historian at the University of Chicago, has described as "a racial removal program".[168] The majority of those removed were U.S. citizens.[168] Rep. Luis Gutierrez, D-Ill., cosponsor of a U.S. House Bill that calls for a commission to study the "deportation and coerced emigration" of U.S. citizens and legal residents, has expressed concerns that history could repeat itself, and that should illegal immigration be made into a felony, this could prompt a "massive deportation of U.S. citizens".[168]
In Operation Wetback in 1954, the United States and the Mexican governments cooperated to deport illegal immigrant Mexicans in the U.S. to Mexico. This cooperation was part of more harmonious Mexico United States relations starting in World War II. Joint border policing operations were established in the 1940s when the Bracero Program (1942 1964) brought qualified Mexicans to the U.S. as guest workers. Many Mexicans who did not qualify for the program migrated illegally. According to Mexican law, Mexican workers needed authorization to accept employment in the U.S. As Mexico industrialized post-World War II in what was called the Mexican Miracle, Mexico wanted to preserve "one of its greatest natural resources, a cheap and flexible labor supply."[169] Some illegal immigrants, in some cases along with their U.S. born children (who are citizens according to U.S. law),[170] fearful of potential violence as police swarmed through Mexican American barrios throughout the southeastern states, stopping "Mexican-looking" citizens on the street and asking for identification, fled to Mexico.[170]
In 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act that gave amnesty to 3 million illegal immigrants in the country.[171]
A direct effect of the deportation laws of 1996 and the Patriot Act has been a dramatic increase in deportations. Prior to these acts deportations had remained at about an average of 20,000 per year. Between 1990 and 1995 deportations had increased to about an average of 40,000 a year. From 1996 to 2005 the yearly average had increased to over 180,000. In the year 2005 the number of deportations reached 208,521 with less than half being deported under criminal grounds.[172] According to a June 2013 report published by the Washington Office on Latin America, dangerous deportation practices are on the rise and pose a serious threat to the safety of the migrants being deported. These practices include repatriating migrants to border cities with high levels of drug-related violence and criminal activity, night deportations (approximately 1 in 5 migrants reports being deported between the hours of 10 pm and 5 am), and "lateral repatriations", or the practice of moving migrants from the region where they were detained to areas hundreds of miles away.[173] These practices increase the risk of gangs and organized criminal groups preying upon the newly arrived migrants.
In 2013, deportation prioritization guidance used by Immigration and Customs enforcement, was extended to Customs and Border Protection, under the Obama Administration's prosecutorial discretion plan.[174]
Under the Obama administration, removals peaked in fiscal year (FY) 2012, when 409,849 persons were removed (about 55% of whom had a criminal conviction, with some additional number with a pending criminal charge).[175] and FY 2013, when 438,421 persons were removed.[176] Deportations thereafter declined while still remaining high: there were 414,481 deportations in FY 2014,[177] 235,413 deportations in FY 2015,[178] 240,255 deportations in FY 2016.[175][178] Under the Trump administration, deportations rose but remained lower than the Obama-era peaks.[178][175]  There were 226,119 deportations in fiscal year 2017,[175] and 256,085 deportations in FY 2018.[175]
A study in 2005 by the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank, estimated that the cost of forcibly removing most of the nation's illegal immigrants (then estimated to be about 10 million) would be $41 billion a year, more than the entire annual budget of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.[179] The study estimated that the cost over five years would be between $206 billion to $230 billion, depending on how many departed voluntarily.[179]  A 2017 study published in the Journal on Migration and Human Security found that a mass-deportation program would create immense social and economic costs, including a cumulative GDP reduction of $4.7 trillion over a decade; damage to the U.S. housing market (because an estimated 1.2 million mortgages are held by households that include one or more undocumented immigrants); and a 47% drop in the median household income for the U.S.'s estimated 3.3 million "mixed-status" households (household that include at least one undocumented immigrant and at least one U.S. citizen), which would result in a major increase in poverty.[180]
Military involvement
In 1995, the United States Congress considered an exemption from the Posse Comitatus Act, which generally prohibits direct participation of U.S. soldiers and airmen (and sailors and marines by policy of the Department of the Navy) in domestic law enforcement activities, such as search, seizure, and arrests.[181]
In 1997, marines shot and killed 18-year-old U.S. citizen Esequiel Hern ndez Jr[182] while on a mission to interdict smuggling and illegal immigration near the border community of Redford, Texas. The marines observed the high school student from concealment while he was tending his family's goats in the vicinity of their ranch. At one point, Hernandez raised his .22-caliber rifle and fired shots in the direction of the concealed soldiers. He was subsequently tracked for 20 minutes then shot and killed.[183][184] In reference to the incident, military lawyer Craig T. Trebilcock argues, "the fact that armed military troops were placed in a position with the mere possibility that they would have to use force to subdue civilian criminal activity reflects a significant policy shift by the executive branch away from the posse comitatus doctrine."[185] The killing of Hernandez led to a congressional review[186] and an end to a nine-year-old policy of the military aiding the Border Patrol.[187]
After the September 11 attacks in 2001, the United States again considered placing soldiers along the U.S. Mexico border as a security measure.[188] In May 2006, President George W. Bush announced plans to use the National Guard to strengthen enforcement of the U.S.-Mexico Border from illegal immigrants,[189] emphasizing that Guard units "will not be involved in direct law enforcement activities".[190]
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) called on the President not to deploy troops to deter illegal immigrants, and stated that a "deployment of National Guard troops violates the spirit of the Posse Comitatus Act".[191] According to the State of the Union address in January 2007,[192] more than 6,000 National Guard members had been sent to the border to supplement the Border Patrol,[193] costing in excess of $750 million.[194]
Sanctuary cities
Main article: Sanctuary city
 Sanctuary Cities in the United States* State has legislation in place that establishes a statewide sanctuary for illegal immigrants  County or county equivalent either contains a municipality that is a sanctuary for illegal immigrants, or is one itself  All county jails in the state do not honor ICE detainers  Alongside statewide legislation or policies establishing sanctuary for illegal immigrants, county contains a municipality that has policy or has taken action to further provide sanctuary to illegal immigrants *Map is based on data published by ICE in a February 2017 report outlining jurisdictions that have declined ICE detainers.
Several U.S. cities have instructed their own law enforcement personnel and civilian employees not to notify the federal government when they become aware of illegal immigrants living within their jurisdiction.
 A map of U.S. states colored by their policy on sanctuary cities. States colored in Red have banned sanctuary cities statewide. States highlighted in Blue are pro-sanctuary states, whereas States colored Gray are unknown to be either a pro- or anti- sanctuary state.
There is no official definition of "sanctuary city".[195] Cities which have been referred to as "sanctuary cities" by various politicians include Washington, D.C.; New York City; Los Angeles; Chicago; San Francisco;[196] San Diego; Austin; Salt Lake City; Dallas; Detroit; Honolulu; Houston; Jersey City; Minneapolis; Miami; Newark; Denver; Aurora, Colorado; Baltimore; Seattle; Portland, Oregon; Portland, Maine; and Senath, Missouri, have become "sanctuary cities", having adopted ordinances refraining from stopping or questioning individuals for the sole purpose of determining their immigration status.[197][198][clarification needed] Most of these ordinances are in place at the state and county, not city, level. These policies do not prevent the local authorities from investigating crimes committed by illegal immigrants.[195] In 2020, armed federal officers from CBP were to be sent to sanctuary cities across the country to perform routine immigration arrests.[199]
Attacks on immigrants
According to a 2006 report by the Anti-Defamation League, white supremacists and other extremists were engaging in a growing number of assaults against legal and illegal immigrants and those perceived to be immigrants.[200][needs update] including assault on migrants from Latin America.
Community-based involvement
The No More Deaths organization offers food, water, and medical aid to migrants crossing the desert regions of the American Southwest in an effort to reduce the increasing number of deaths along the border.[201]
In 2014, 'Dreamer Moms' began protesting, hoping that President Obama will grant them legal status. On November 12, 2014, there was a hunger strike near the White House undertaken by the group Dreamer Moms. On November 21, 2014, Obama provided 5 million illegal immigrants legal status because he said that mass deportation "would be both impossible and contrary to our character." However, this decision was challenged in court during the Trump administration and then overturned.[202]
Other organizations and initiatives offer support to populations of illegal immigrants within the United States, such as Kichwa Hatari, a radio station in New York City that translates information from Spanish into the Kichwa language for broadcast to Ecuadorian illegal immigrants.[203]
Economic impact
Main article: Economic impact of illegal immigrants in the United StatesIllegal immigrants increase the size of the U.S. economy and contribute to economic growth.[4] Illegal immigrants contribute to lower prices of U.S.-produced goods and services, which benefits consumers.[4]
Economists estimate that legalization of the current unauthorized immigrant population would increase the immigrants' earnings[20][21][22][204][4] and consumption considerably.[23] A 2016 National Bureau of Economic Research paper found that "legalization would increase the economic contribution of the unauthorized population by about 20%, to 3.6% of private-sector GDP."[205] Legalization is also likely to reduce untaxed labor in the informal economy.[4] A 2016 study found that Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), which allows unauthorized immigrants who migrated to the United States as minors to temporarily stay, increases labor force participation, decreases the unemployment rate and increases the income for DACA-eligible immigrants.[206] The study estimated that DACA moved 50,000 to 75,000 unauthorized immigrants into employment.[206] Another 2016 study found that DACA-eligible households were 38% less likely than non-eligible unauthorized immigrant households to live in poverty.[207]
A 2017 study in the Journal of Public Economics found that more intense immigration enforcement increased the likelihood that U.S.-born children with illegal immigrant parents would live in poverty.[208]
Native welfare
A number of studies have shown that illegal immigration increases the welfare of natives.[209][18][19] A 2015 study found that " increasing deportation rates and tightening border control weakens low-skilled labor markets, increasing unemployment of native low-skilled workers. Legalization, instead, decreases the unemployment rate of low-skilled natives and increases income per native."[210] A study by economist Giovanni Peri concluded that between 1990 and 2004, immigrant workers raised the wages of native born workers in general by 4%, while more recent immigrants suppressed wages of previous immigrants.[211]
In a 2017 literature review by the National Academy of Sciences, they explain the positive impact of illegal immigrants on natives in the following way:[4]
The entry of new workers through migration increases the likelihood of filling a vacant position quickly and thus reduces the net cost of posting new offers. The fact that immigrants in each skill category earn less than natives reinforces this effect. Though immigrants compete with natives for these additional jobs, the overall number of new positions employers choose to create is larger than the number of additional entrants to the labor market. The effect is to lower the unemployment rate and to strengthen the bargaining position of workers.
According to Georgetown University economist Anna Maria Mayda and University of California, Davis economist Giovanni Peri, "deportation of undocumented immigrants not only threatens the day-to-day life of several million people, it also undermines the economic viability of entire sectors of the U.S. economy." Research shows that illegal immigrants complement and extend middle- and high-skilled American workers, making it possible for those sectors to employ more Americans. Without access to illegal immigrants, U.S. firms would be incentivized to offshore jobs and import foreign-produced goods. Several highly competitive sectors that depend disproportionately on illegal immigrant labor, such as agriculture, would dramatically shrink and sectors, such as hospitality and food services, would see higher prices for consumers. Regions and cities that have large illegal populations are also likely to see harms to the local economy were the illegal immigrant population removed. While Mayda and Peri note that some low-skilled American workers would see marginal gains, it is likely that the effects on net job creation and wages would be negative for the U.S. as a whole.[17]
A 2002 study of the effects of illegal immigration and border enforcement on wages in border communities from 1990 to 1997 found little impact of border enforcement on wages in U.S. border cities, and concluded that their findings were consistent with two hypotheses, "border enforcement has a minimal impact on illegal immigration, and illegal immigration from Mexico has a minimal impact on wages in U.S. border cities".[212]
A 2021 study in the American Economic Journal found that undocumented immigrants had beneficial effects on the employment and wages of American natives. Stricter immigration enforcement adversely affected employment and wages of American natives.[213]
According to University of California, San Diego economist Gordon H. Hanson, "there is little evidence that legal immigration is economically preferable to illegal immigration. In fact, illegal immigration responds to market forces in ways that legal immigration does not. Illegal migrants tend to arrive in larger numbers when the U.S. economy is booming (relative to Mexico and the Central American countries that are the source of most illegal immigration to the United States) and move to regions where job growth is strong. Legal immigration, in contrast, is subject to arbitrary selection criteria and bureaucratic delays, which tend to disassociate legal inflows from U.S. labor-market conditions. Over the last half-century, there appears to be little or no response of legal immigration to the U.S. unemployment rate."[214]
Fiscal effects
Illegal immigrants are not eligible for most federally-funded safety net programs,[215] and pay more in taxes than similar low-income groups because they are not eligible for the federal earned income tax credit.[216] Illegal immigrants are barred from receiving benefits from Medicare, non-emergency Medicaid, or the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and the Medicare program; they also cannot participate in health insurance marketplaces and are not eligible to receive insurance subsidies under the Affordable Care Act.[215] Illegal immigrants contribute up to $12 billion annually to the Social Security Trust Fund, but are not eligible to receive any Social Security benefits.[215] Unless the illegal immigrants transition to legal status, they will not collect these benefits.[215][4] According to a 2007 literature review by the Congressional Budget Office, "Over the past two decades, most efforts to estimate the fiscal impact of immigration in the United States have concluded that, in aggregate and over the long term, tax revenues of all types generated by immigrants both legal and unauthorized exceed the cost of the services they use."[16]
While the aggregate fiscal effects are beneficial to the United States, unauthorized immigration has small but net negative fiscal effects on state and local governments.[16] According to the 2017 National Academy of Science report on immigration, one reason for the adverse fiscal impact on state and local governments is that "the federal government reimburses state and local entities a fraction of costs to incarcerate criminal aliens, the remaining costs are borne by local governments."[4]
A paper in the peer-reviewed journal Tax Lawyer from the American Bar Association concluded that illegal immigrants contribute more in taxes than they cost in social services.[217]
A 2016 study found that, over the period 2000 2011, illegal immigrants contributed $2.2 to $3.8 billion more to the Medicare Trust Fund "than they withdrew annually (a total surplus of $35.1 billion). Had unauthorized immigrants neither contributed to nor withdrawn from the Trust Fund during those 11 years, it would become insolvent in 2029 1 year earlier than currently predicted."[218]
Mortgages
Around 2005, an increasing number of banks saw illegal immigrants as an untapped resource for growing their own revenue stream and contended that providing illegal immigrants with mortgages would help revitalize local communities, with many community banks providing home loans for illegal immigrants. At the time, critics complained that this practice would reward and encourage illegal immigration, as well as contribute to an increase in predatory lending practices. One banking consultant said that banks which were planning to offer mortgages to illegal immigrants were counting on the fact that immigration enforcement was very lax, with deportation unlikely for anyone who had not committed a crime.[219]
Crime and law enforcement
Main article: Illegal immigration to the United States and crime
See also: Immigration to the United States  Crime
Relationship between illegal immigration and crime
Illegal immigrants are less likely to commit crimes than native-born citizens in the United States.[25][220][24][221][222][223][224] Multiple studies have found that undocumented immigration to the United States did not increase violent crime.[225][226][227] A 2016 study found no link between illegal immigrant populations and violent crime, although there is a small but significant association between illegal immigrants and drug-related crime.[228] A 2017 study found that "Increased undocumented immigration was significantly associated with reductions in drug arrests, drug overdose deaths, and DUI arrests, net of other factors."[229] A 2017 study found that California's extension of driving licenses to unauthorized immigrants "did not increase the total number of accidents or the occurrence of fatal accidents, but it did reduce the likelihood of hit and run accidents, thereby improving traffic safety and reducing costs for California drivers ... providing unauthorized immigrants with access to driver's licenses can create positive externalities for the communities in which they live."[230] A 2018 study in the American Economic Journal: Economic Policy found that by restricting the employment opportunities for unauthorized immigrants, the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA) likely caused an increase in crime.[231][232] A 2018 PLOS One study estimated that the undocumented immigrant population in the United States was 22 million (approximately twice as large as the estimate derived from U.S. Census Bureau figures); an author of the study notes that this has implications for the relationship between undocumented immigration and crime suggesting the correlation is lower than previously estimated: "You have the same number of crimes but now spread over twice as many people as was believed before, which right away means that the crime rate among undocumented immigrants is essentially half whatever was previously believed."[233] A 2019 analysis found no evidence that illegal immigration increased crime.[234] A 2020 study found little evidence of a relationship between unauthorized immigration and terrorism.[235]
Impact of immigration enforcement
Research suggests immigration enforcement deters unauthorized immigration[104] but has no impact on crime rates.[28][29][26][236] Immigration enforcement is costly and may divert resources from other forms of law enforcement.[104][236] Tougher immigration enforcement has been associated with greater migrant deaths, as migrants take riskier routes and use the services of smugglers.[104][237] Tough border enforcement may also encourage unauthorized immigrants to settle in the United States, rather than regularly travel across the border where they may be captured.[104][238] Immigration enforcement programs have been shown to lower employment and wages among unauthorized immigrants, while increasing their participation in the informal economy.[104]
Research finds that Secure Communities, an immigration enforcement program which led to a quarter of a million of detentions, had no observable impact on the crime rate.[28][239] A 2015 study found that the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act, which legalized almost 3 million immigrants, led to "decreases in crime of 3 5 percent, primarily due to decline in property crimes, equivalent to 120,000 180,000 fewer violent and property crimes committed each year due to legalization".[29]
A 2017 review study of the existing literature noted that the existing studies had found that sanctuary cities which adopt policies designed to avoid prosecuting people solely for being an illegal immigrant either have no impact on crime or that they lower the crime rate.[27] A second 2017 study in the journal Urban Affairs Review found that sanctuary policy itself has no statistically meaningful effect on crime.[240][241][242][243][244] The findings of the study were misinterpreted by Attorney General Jeff Sessions in a July 2017 speech when he claimed that the study showed that sanctuary cities were more prone to crime than cities without sanctuary policies.[245][246] A third study in the journal Justice Quarterly found evidence that the adoption of sanctuary policies reduced the robbery rate but had no impact on the homicide rate except in cities with larger Mexican undocumented immigrant populations which had lower rates of homicide.[247] Two studies have found that local cooperation with ICE adversely affect public safety by reducing local reporting of crime by Latino communities.[248][249]
According to a study by Tom K. Wong, associate professor of political science at the University of California, San Diego, published by the Center for American Progress, a progressive think tank: "Crime is statistically significantly lower in sanctuary counties compared to nonsanctuary counties. Moreover, economies are stronger in sanctuary counties from higher median household income, less poverty, and less reliance on public assistance to higher labor force participation, higher employment-to-population ratios, and lower unemployment."[250] The study also concluded that sanctuary cities build trust between local law enforcement and the community, which enhances public safety overall.[251] The study evaluated sanctuary and non-sanctuary cities while controlling for differences in population, the foreign-born percentage of the population, and the percentage of the population that is Latino."[250]
A 2018 study found no evidence that apprehensions of undocumented immigrants in districts in the United States reduced crime rates.[252]
After the Obama administration reduced federal immigration enforcement, Democratic counties reduced their immigration enforcement more than Republican counties; a paper by a University of Pennsylvania PhD candidate found "that Democratic counties with higher non-citizen population shares saw greater increases in clearance rates, a measure of policing efficiency, with no increase in crime rates. The results indicate that reducing immigration enforcement did not increase crime and rather led to an increase in policing efficiency, either because it allowed police to focus efforts on solving more serious crimes or because it elicited greater cooperation of non-citizens with police."[236] A 2003 paper by two Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas economists found "that while the volume of illegal immigration is not related to changes in property-related crime, there is a significant positive correlation with the incidence of violent crime. This is most likely due to extensive smuggling activity along the border. Border enforcement meanwhile is significantly negatively related to crime rates. The bad news is that the deterrent effect of the border patrol diminishes over this time period, and the net impact of more enforcement on border crime since the late 1990s is zero."[253]
According to Cornell University economist Francine Blau and University of California at Berkeley economist Gretchen Donehower, the existing "evidence does not suggest that ... stepping up enforcement of existing immigration laws would generate savings to existing taxpayers."[254] By complicating circular migration and temporary work by migrants, and by incentivizing migrants to settle permanently in the U.S., the 2017 National Academy of Sciences report on immigration notes that "it is certainly possible that additional costs have been created to the economy by the increased border enforcement, beyond the narrow costs of the programs themselves in the federal budget."[4]
Document fraud
Illegal immigrants sometimes use Social Security numbers belonging to others in order to obtain fake work documentation.[255][256][257] In 2009, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the case of Flores-Figueroa v. United States that illegal immigrants cannot be prosecuted for identity theft if they use "made-up" Social Security numbers that they do not know belong to someone else; to be guilty of identity theft with regard to social security numbers, they must know that the social security numbers that they use belong to others.[258]
Education
An estimated 65,000 undocumented youth graduate from high school every year but only 5 to 10 percent go on to college.[citation needed] Research shows that policies regarding tuition and admissions procedures, impact students the most.[259] As of October 2015, twenty states had given undocumented students' in-state resident tuition (ISRT) while five states had completely prohibited their enrollment.[259] Although states grant undocumented students resident tuition, federal laws do not award undocumented immigrants financial aid.[260] Without financial aid, students cannot afford higher education, making it difficult for this community to attain social mobility.[261][260]
In 1982, Plyler vs Doe granted all students, regardless of status, the right to a public K-12 education.[259] The ruling found that denying undocumented students access to public education outweighed the effects of not educating them, however states continued implementing policies that challenged the Supreme Court decision.[262] In 1994, California implemented Proposition 187, prohibiting undocumented students from enrolling in schools and required educators to report students who they suspected were undocumented.[263] Likewise, the state of Alabama in 2011, requiring administrators to report the status of recently enrolled students; which resulted in a 13% dropout rate that year.[262][263]
Organizations such as the American Federation of Teachers have created guides for educators of immigrant and refugee students, urging schools to build policies that provide these students with protection from policies that would criminalize them.[264][263] In 2014, Operation Border Guardians targeted undocumented immigrants who had come to the United States as minors and recently turned 18 or were 16 with a criminal history.[263] Federal immigration judges sent out court orders to apprehend students that were not currently appealing their cases.[263] Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) was detaining students on their way to school. When undocumented students turn eighteen, their youth status no longer protects them from immigration policies such as deportation.[265] The National Education Association (NEA) and the National School Board Association (NSBA) in 2009, created guidelines for educators working with undocumented students, informing school personnel about their students  rights concerning immigration legislation as it transpires in the community.[266][263] The American Federation of Teachers created a guideline specifically speaking to concern regarding deportation.[263]
A case study conducted on Aurora Elementary examined how school personnel quickly developed boundaries to ensure the safety of their students when ICE appeared in the community.[263] The study evaluated how educators  established school policies with limited knowledge regarding policies. In the study, 14 staff members of Aurora spoke about the fear it created in the community. The school was placed on an unofficial lockdown, and no one was to leave campus unless given permission. Days following the event, parents stopped sending their children to school. After speaking to the district's legal department, they informed her that they would not be able to do anything in their part, but that she could call families and inform them about the ICE raids. She worked with school personnel to create school policies that protected the students when immigration legislation transpired in the community. Further, aligning school policies with district goals to ensure that undocumented students  education is protected.[263]
Studies have shown that undocumented immigrants are wary of disclosing their immigration status to counselors, teachers and mentors. In other words, undocumented students sometimes did not disclose their status to the very individuals that could help them find pathways to higher education.[267][268]
Harm to non-citizens without legal status
There are significant dangers associated with illegal immigration including potential death when crossing the border. Since the 1994 implementation of an immigration-control effort called Operation Gatekeeper, immigrants have attempted to cross the border in more dangerous locations.[269][270] Those crossing the border come unprepared, without food, water, proper clothing, or protection from the elements or dangerous animals; sometimes the immigrants are abandoned by those smuggling them.[270] Deaths also occur while resisting arrest. In May 2010, the National Human Rights Commission in Mexico accused Border Patrol agents of tasering illegal immigrant Anastasio Hern ndez-Rojas to death. Media reports that Hern ndez-Rojas started a physical altercation with patrol agents and later autopsy findings concluded that the suspect had trace amounts of methamphetamine in his blood levels which contributed to his death.[271][272] The foreign ministry in Mexico City has demanded an explanation from San Diego and federal authorities, according to Tijuana newspapers.[271] According to the U.S. Border Patrol, there were 987 assaults on Border Patrol agents in 2007 and there were a total of 12 people killed by agents in 2007 and 2008.[273]
According to the Washington Office on Latin America's Border Fact Check site, Border Patrol rarely investigates allegations of abuse against migrants, and advocacy organizations say, "even serious incidents such as the shootings of migrants result in administrative, not criminal, investigations and sanctions."[274]
Health
Main article: Healthcare availability for illegal immigrants in the United States
A 2017 Science study found that Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), which allows unauthorized immigrants who migrated to the United States as minors to temporarily stay, led to improved mental health outcomes for the children of DACA-eligible mothers.[275] A 2017 Lancet Public Health study reported found that DACA-eligible individuals had better mental health outcomes as a result of their DACA-eligibility.[276] Stringent immigration enforcement has been linked to worse mental health among undocumented immigrants.[277]
Undocumented immigrants, particularly those living in parts of the US with more restrictive policies, are less likely to access health services. If they do see a health care provider, they are less likely to be able to comply with their recommendations. Additionally, undocumented immigrants have higher rates of depressive symptoms than legal immigrants.[278] More restrictive policies also negatively impact the likelihood that a pregnant immigrant will receive prenatal care.[278] In contrast, a 2017 study found that extending Medicaid to undocumented immigrants led to improvements in infant health and reductions in infant mortality.[279] A quasi-experimental study found that after the Postville raid in Iowa in 2008, newborns were 24% more likely to be underweight at birth compared to the year before, adjusting for maternal risk factors and country of origin.[278]
Exploitation by employers
See also: Human trafficking in the United States
Many Mexican immigrants have been trafficked by either their smugglers or the employers after they have gotten to the United States.  According to research at San Diego State University, approximately 6% of illegal Mexican immigrants were trafficked by their smugglers while entering the United States and 28% were trafficked by their employers after entering the United States. Trafficking rates were particularly high in the construction and cleaning industries. They also determined that 55% of illegal Mexican immigrants were abused or exploited by either their smugglers or employers.[280]
Indian, Russian, Thai, Vietnamese and Chinese women have been reportedly brought to the United States under false pretenses. "As many as 50,000 people are illicitly trafficked into the United States annually, according to a 1999 CIA study. Once here, they're forced to work as prostitutes, sweatshop laborers, farmhands, and servants in private homes." U.S. authorities call it "a modern form of slavery".[281][282] Many Latina women have been lured under false pretenses to illegally come to the United States and are instead forced to work as prostitutes catering to the immigrant population. Non-citizen customers without proper documentation that have been detained in prostitution stings are generally deported.[283]
Death
See also: Haitian diaspora  Deaths
Many Central American migrants are abducted or killed during their journey. A 2015 estimate suggested that as many as 120,000 migrants had disappeared within Mexico during the previous ten years.[284] Thousands are killed or maimed riding the roofs of cargo trains in Mexico.[285]
Death by exposure to the elements leading to hypothermia, dehydration, heat stroke, drowning, and suffocation has been reported in the deserts, particularly during the hot summer season.[286] Also, people may die or be injured when they attempt to avoid law enforcement, for example, in high speed pursuits.[287]
Workplace injury
Recent studies have found that illegal immigration status is perceived by Latino immigrant workers as a barrier to safety at work.[288][289]
Criticisms of ICE Detention
With deportation as a tool of the U.S. government against undocumented immigrants, practices by immigration authorities have drawn the ire of the public and activists about detention facilities and deportations. In the act of detaining non-citizens, ICE has come under scrutiny for its practices of separating families. In addition, ICE has been wrongfully assessing ages of unaccompanied children. The Department of Homeland Security rely on dental radiograph tests to ascertain the ages of those in custody. But these tests only determine an age range, often encompassing both minor and adult ages, resulting in many minors being placed in adult prisons.[290] "This American Life" has reported on one wrongfully detained migrant arriving from Cambodia to meet her finance, who's dental tests said she was a minor. She was wrongfully held ICE tests to determine ages of detained migrants have proven at best faulty and at worst unscientific.
Additionally, activists and immigrant advocates have criticized the role of private prison companies in dealing with the detention of undocumented immigrants. Reports have detailed people in ICE custody being forced to work for nothing or a dollar-a-day cooking, doing laundry, and other essential tasks for these prisons.[291] In late December 2017, the U.S. Civil Rights Commission called on Congress and the Department of Homeland Security to investigate abusive labor practices of these private prisons, including other reports saying detainees had been paid less than a dollar a day in the facilities "Voluntary Work Program."[292] In the report, the Commission specifically cited private prisons as a main concern, given the financial benefit of low-paid labor being used to "maximize profits."
Celebrities
Celebrities who perform their normal paid duties may suddenly find themselves working illegally if they travel here.[293] (See  In the workforce.) This has become especially common with the increase in Internet celebrities.[293] Because they are doing something many do without pay and are traveling with no more equipment than many travelers do every day, they may not be aware that they are breaking the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA).[293]
Cultural references
A number of films and at least one novel tell stories based on the infamous voyage of the Golden Venture, a ship carrying would-be illegal immigrants from China that ran aground in New York Harbor in 1993.
Commercial films
The 1996 film Deadly Voyage treats the perils endured by would-be immigrants attempting to enter the United States illegally.[294]
Documentary films
How Democracy Works Now: Twelve Stories is a 12-part documentary film series that examines the American political system through the lens of immigration reform from 2001 to 2007, from filmmaking team Shari Robertson and Michael Camerini. Several films in the series contain a large focus on the issue of illegal immigration in the U.S. and feature advocates from both sides of the debate. Since the debut of the first five films, the series has become an important resource for advocates, policymakers and educators.[295]
The series premiered on HBO with the broadcast debut of The Senator's Bargain on March 24, 2010. A directors' cut of The Senator's Bargain was featured in the 2010 Human Rights Watch Film Festival at Lincoln Center, with the theatrical title Story 12: Last Best Chance. That film featured Edward Kennedy's efforts to pass the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007. The second story in the 12-part series, Mountains and Clouds, opened the festival in the same year.
The films document the attempt to pass comprehensive immigration reform during the years from 2001 to 2007, and present a behind-the-scenes story of the success (and failure) of many bills from that period with an effect on illegal immigration including:
The DREAM Act
REAL ID Act
Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007
Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act
Marking Up The Dream, Story Six in the How Democracy Works Now series, focuses on the heated 2003 markup in The Senate Judiciary Committee, contrasting optimistic supporters who viewed The DREAM Act as a small bi-partisan bill that would help children, with opponents who saw the legislation as thinly veiled amnesty. Also presented in the film are the rallies and demonstrations from illegal immigrant students who would benefit from the DREAM Act. The film opens with demonstration by some illegal high-school students as they stage a mock graduation ceremony on the U.S. Capitol lawn.
See also
United States portal
Amnesty
Angel Families
Canada United States border
Coyotaje
Deportation and removal from the United States
Driver's licenses for illegal immigrants in the United States
History of laws concerning immigration and naturalization in the United States
Human trafficking
Human trafficking in Canada
Human trafficking in Mexico
Illegal immigrant population of the United States
Illegal immigration to Canada
Illegal immigration to Mexico
Illegal immigration to Russia
Immigration
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Immigration reduction in the United States
Immigration reform
Immigration to the United States
Inequality within immigrant families (United States)
List of detention sites in the United States (migration-related sites)
Mexican migration
Mexico United States border
Mexico United States border crisis
Nativism (politics)
Office of Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement
Open borders
Opposition to immigration
United States Border Patrol
United States Customs and Border Protection
References
Footnotes
^ "... if an alien is not permitted to enter this country, or, having entered contrary to law, is expelled, he is in fact cut off from worshipping or speaking or publishing or petitioning in the country; but that is merely because of his exclusion therefrom. He does not become one of the people to whom these things are secured by our Constitution by an attempt to enter, forbidden by law. To appeal to the Constitution is to concede that this is a land governed by that supreme law, and as under it the power to exclude has been determined to exist, those who are excluded cannot assert the rights in general obtaining in a land to which they do not belong as citizens or otherwise." United States ex. rel. Turner v. Williams.
Citations
^ a b "United States v. Rizo-Rizo, ___ F.4th ___, No. 20-50172" (PDF). Ninth Circuit. Ninth Circuit. October 29, 2021. p. 3.
"United States v. Perez-Velasquez, ___ F.4th ___, No. 19-2118". Tenth Circuit. Casetext.com. October 25, 2021.
^ a b 8 U.S.C. 1181(c)
8 U.S.C. 1326(a)(2)(B)
"Vartelas v. Holder, 566 U.S. 257 (2012)". U.S. Supreme Court. Harvard Law School. March 28, 2012. p. 263. An alien seeking 'admission' to the United States is subject to various requirements, see, e.g.,   1181(a), and cannot gain entry if she is deemed 'inadmissible' on any of the numerous grounds set out in the immigration statutes, see   1182.
^ a b c d e f "5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S." Pew Research Center. November 28, 2018. Retrieved January 11, 2019.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Blau, Francine D.; Mackie, Christopher, eds. (September 21, 2016). "9. State and Local Effects of Immigration" (PDF). The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration. National Academy of Sciences. doi:10.17226/23550. hdl:10919/83151. ISBN 9780309444453.
^ "How Much Credit Can President Trump Take for the Secure Border?". Cato Institute. August 8, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017.
^ "Barack Obama, in Austin, says illegal immigration at 40-year low". @politifact. Retrieved August 23, 2017.
^ "Trump says illegal immigration lowest in 17 years". @politifact. Retrieved August 23, 2017.
^ "Are more undocumented immigrants leaving than coming?". @politifact. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
^ Sullivan, Eileen; Jordan, Miriam (October 22, 2021). "Illegal Border Crossings, Driven by Pandemic and Natural Disasters, Soar to Record High". The New York Times. Retrieved March 24, 2022.
^ a b Seitz, Amanda; Weissert, Will (January 4, 2019). "AP FACT CHECK: Visa overstays outpace border crossings". AP NEWS. Retrieved January 11, 2019.
^ a b Qiu, Linda (June 20, 2018). "Border Crossings Have Been Declining for Years, Despite Claims of a 'Crisis of Illegal Immigration'". The New York Times. Retrieved January 11, 2019.
^ "Chapter 2: Birthplaces of U.S. Unauthorized Immigrants" (Web). Pew Hispanic Center. November 18, 2014.
^ "Illegal Immigration - Top Arguments For and Against". ProCon.org. Retrieved September 3, 2022.
^ "Why Don't Unauthorized Migrants Come Here Legally?". United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. Retrieved September 3, 2022.
^ Nowrasteh, Alex. "The Most Common Arguments Against Immigration and Why They're Wrong" (PDF). Immigration Research Library. Retrieved September 3, 2022.
^ a b c "The Impact of Unauthorized Immigrants on the Budgets of State and Local Governments". Congressional Budget Office. December 2007.
^ a b Mayda, Anna Maria; Peri, Giovanni (June 2017). "The economic impact of US immigration policies in the Age of Trump" (PDF).  In Bown, Chad P. (ed.). Economics and Policy in the Age of Trump. VoxEU.org. pp. 69 77.
^ a b Liu, Xiangbo (December 1, 2010). "On the macroeconomic and welfare effects of illegal immigration" (PDF). Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control. 34 (12): 2547 2567. doi:10.1016/j.jedc.2010.06.030.
^ a b Palivos, Theodore; Yip, Chong K. (September 1, 2010). "Illegal immigration in a heterogeneous labor market". Journal of Economics. 101 (1): 21 47. doi:10.1007/s00712-010-0139-y. S2CID 153804786.
^ a b Rivera-Batiz, Francisco L. (1999). "Undocumented Workers in the Labor Market: An Analysis of the Earnings of Legal and Illegal Mexican Immigrants in the United States". Journal of Population Economics. 12 (1): 91 116. doi:10.1007/s001480050092. JSTOR 20007616. PMID 12295042. S2CID 44528470.
^ a b Hall, M.; Greenman, E.; Farkas, G. (December 1, 2010). "Legal Status and Wage Disparities for Mexican Immigrants". Social Forces. 89 (2): 491 513. doi:10.1353/sof.2010.0082. PMC 4235135. PMID 25414526.
^ a b Bratsberg, Bernt; Ragan, Jr., James F.; Nasir, Zafar M. (July 1, 2002). "The Effect of Naturalization on Wage Growth: A Panel Study of Young Male Immigrants". Journal of Labor Economics. 20 (3): 568 597. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.199.5549. doi:10.1086/339616. S2CID 16293559.
^ a b Dustmann, Christian; Fasani, Francesco; Speciale, Biagio (July 1, 2017). "Illegal Migration and Consumption Behavior of Immigrant Households". Journal of the European Economic Association. 15 (3): 654 691. doi:10.1093/jeea/jvw017. hdl:10419/130459. S2CID 73648942.
^ a b Gonzalez, Benjamin; Collingwood, Loren; El-Khatib, Stephen Omar (2019). "The Politics of Refuge: Sanctuary Cities, Crime, and Undocumented Immigration". Urban Affairs Review. 55: 107808741770497. doi:10.1177/1078087417704974. S2CID 32604699. Quote: "most studies have shown that illegal immigrants tend to commit less crime than the native born"
^ a b Light, Michael T.; He, Jingying; Robey, Jason P. (December 2, 2020). "Comparing crime rates between undocumented immigrants, legal immigrants, and native-born US citizens in Texas". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 117 (51): 32340 32347. Bibcode:2020PNAS..11732340L. doi:10.1073/pnas.2014704117. PMC 7768760. PMID 33288713.
^ a b c Collingwood, Loren; Gonzalez-O'Brien, Benjamin; El-Khatib, Stephen (October 3, 2016). "Sanctuary cities do not experience an increase in crime". Washington Post. Retrieved October 3, 2016.
^ a b Mart nez, Daniel E.; Mart nez-Schuldt, Ricardo D.; Cantor, Guillermo (2017). "Providing Sanctuary or Fostering Crime? A Review of the Research on 'Sanctuary Cities' and Crime". Sociology Compass. 12: e12547. doi:10.1111/soc4.12547.
^ a b c Miles, Thomas J.; Cox, Adam B. (October 21, 2015). "Does Immigration Enforcement Reduce Crime? Evidence from Secure Communities". The Journal of Law and Economics. 57 (4): 937 973. doi:10.1086/680935. S2CID 8406495.
^ a b c Baker, Scott R. (2015). "Effects of Immigrant Legalization on Crime". American Economic Review. 105 (5): 210 213. doi:10.1257/aer.p20151041.
^ "Citizenship Through Naturalization". US Citizenship and Immigration Services: Department of Homeland Security. April 17, 2019. Archived from the original on February 24, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2013.
^ "Visas". US Department of State. Archived from the original on January 8, 2014.
^ "Title 8   1182   Inadmissible aliens". Cornell University Law School.
^ 
Poblete, Juan (2021). "Diary of an Undocumented Dreamer. Undocumented Vignettes from a Pre-American Life and the Heterogeneity of American Life". Camino Real: Estudios de las Hispanidades Norteamericanas. 16: 123 139.
^ 
"Undocumented Americans". American Psychological Association (APA). 2022. Retrieved November 6, 2022.
^ "Inspections Report". Inspections Division, Office of the Inspector General, Department of Justice.
^ a b c d e f "Modes of Entry for the Unauthorized Migrant Population". Pew Hispanic Center. May 22, 2006. Retrieved February 2, 2011.
^ Hirota, Hidetaka (2017). Expelling the Poor: Atlantic Seaboard States and the Nineteenth-century Origins of American Immigration Policy. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780190619213.
^ "FindLaw's United States Supreme Court case and opinions".
^ "FindLaw's United States Supreme Court case and opinions".
^ Bromberg, Howard. "Immigration Act of 1917". Immigration to the United States. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved August 16, 2018.
^ "European immigrants to America in early 20th century assimilated successfully, Stanford economist says". Stanford University. Retrieved September 2, 2017.
^ Abramitzky, Ran; Boustan, Leah Platt (2017). "Immigration in American Economic History". Journal of Economic Literature. 55 (4): 1311 1345. doi:10.1257/jel.20151189. PMC 5794227. PMID 29398723.
^ Muller, Thomas (1993). Immigrants and the American City. New York University Press. ISBN 9780814763278.
^ a b "Your immigrant ancestors came here legally? Are you sure?". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Philly.com. June 25, 2017.
^ Alan M. Kraut, "Plagues and Prejudice: Nativism's Construction of Disease in Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century New York City," in David Rosner, ed., Hives of Sickness: Public Health and Epidemics in New York City (New Brunswick, 1995), p. 70: "The number of immigrants returned to their ports of origin never excessed 3 percent of the new arrivals in any given year [during the 1890 1924 period of peak immigration], and the average for the entire period was well below 1 percent."
^ "How the Founding Fathers understood U.S. citizenship". Culture. October 31, 2018. Retrieved December 26, 2019.
^ a b "Race, Nationality, and Reality". National Archives. August 15, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2019.
^ Maddalena Marinari, Unwanted: Italian and Jewish mobilization against restrictive immigration laws, 1882 1965 (UNC Press Books, 2019) pp 43-70.
^ "The Immigration Act of 1924 (The Johnson-Reed Act)". U.S Department of State Office of the Historian. Retrieved December 30, 2018.
^ Fisher, Marc (January 28, 2017). "Open doors, slamming gates: The tumultuous politics of U.S. immigration policy". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 30, 2018.
^ "Public Charge Fact Sheet". USCIS. December 12, 2019. Retrieved January 2, 2020.
^ "IIRIRA 96 - A SUMMARY OF THE NEW IMMIGRATION BILL". Siskind Susser PC. November 30, 1996. Retrieved January 2, 2020.
^ a b "Border Patrol History | U.S. Customs and Border Protection". www.cbp.gov. Retrieved January 2, 2020.
^ Joseph E. Chance, nd Milo Kearney, "The Legacy of the Texas Rangers on the Texas Mexico Border in Light of the Emergence of the Texas Minutemen." Further Studies in Rio Grande Valley History (2006): 171+.
^ Massey, Douglas S.; Durand, Jorge; Pren, Karen A. (March 1, 2016). "Why Border Enforcement Backfired". American Journal of Sociology. 121 (5): 1557 1600. doi:10.1086/684200. PMC 5049707. PMID 27721512.
^ Scott, Eugene; De Vogue, Ariane (June 5, 2017). "Trump says he's calling it a 'travel ban'". CNN. Retrieved January 5, 2019.
^ Lee, Yen Nee (January 28, 2019). "Trump tells WSJ another government shutdown is 'certainly an option'". CNBC. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ a b c "Study Details Lives of Illegal Immigrants in U.S." NPR. NPR. Retrieved January 2, 2012.
^ a b Bryan Baker. Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population Residing in the United States: January 2014. Office of Homeland Security, January 2017.
^ Bahrampour, Tara (September 1, 2010). "Number of illegal immigrants in U.S. drops, report says". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ "5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S." Pew Research Center. Retrieved December 27, 2019.
^ Forsyth, Jim (July 22, 2015). "Study: Immigration from Mexico to the US has dropped 57 percent since the mid-2000s". Business Insider. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ Hanson, Gordon; Liu, Chen; McIntosh, Craig (August 2017). "The Rise and Fall of U.S. Low-Skilled Immigration" (PDF). Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 2017 (1): 83 168. doi:10.1353/eca.2017.0001. JSTOR 90013169. S2CID 158513921.
^ "Unauthorized Immigrants and Their U.S.-Born Children". Pew Hispanic Center. August 11, 2010.
^ Semotiuk, Andy. "Immigration: The Myth Of The 'Anchor Baby'". Forbes. Retrieved August 13, 2015.
^ "Why Trump's military response to a "migrant caravan" is so scary". newstatesman. April 5, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018.
^ "'If our countries were safe, we wouldn't leave': the harsh reality of Mexico's migrant caravan". The Guardian. April 6, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018.
^ "'Yes, we can': caravan of 1,600 Honduran migrants crosses Guatemala border". The Guardian. April 6, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018.
^ "How Central American Youth Test Outdated U.S. Immigration Laws". americasquarterly.org. Retrieved September 13, 2017.
^ Michael D. Shear; Jeremy W. Peters (July 8, 2014). "Obama Asks for $3.7 Billion to Aid Border". The New York Times. Retrieved July 9, 2014. an urgent humanitarian situation.
^ Carl Hulse (July 9, 2014). "Immigrant Surge Rooted in Law to Curb Child Trafficking". The New York Times. Retrieved July 9, 2014.
^ a b Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina; Puttitanun, Thitima (August 1, 2016). "DACA and the Surge in Unaccompanied Minors at the US-Mexico Border". International Migration. 54 (4): 102 117. doi:10.1111/imig.12250.
^ "AP FACT CHECK: What the Trump administration said about DACA". PBS NewsHour. Retrieved September 6, 2017.
^ a b Clemens, Michael A. (July 27, 2017). Violence, Development, and Migration Waves: Evidence from Central American Child Migrant Apprehensions   Working Paper 459. Center For Global Development (Report). Retrieved September 2, 2017.
^ Nakamura, David (June 13, 2014). "Influx of minors across Texas border driven by belief that they will be allowed to stay in U.S." The Washington Post. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ "Overcrowded, unsanitary conditions seen at immigrant detention centers". Los Angeles Times. June 19, 2014. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ "What's Really Happening When Asylum-Seeking Families Are Separated?". Texas Monthly. June 16, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ Schallhorn, Kaitlyn (June 19, 2018). "What Trump's 'zero-tolerance' immigration policy means for children separated from families at border". Fox News. Retrieved December 27, 2019.
^ "Franklin Graham Blames Politicians of the Past for Trump Policy Separating Families at Border". www.christianpost.com. June 14, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Shear, Michael D. (June 16, 2018). "How Trump Came to Enforce a Practice of Separating Migrant Families". The New York Times. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ "Profile of the Unauthorized Population - US". migrationpolicy.org. Retrieved January 9, 2019.
^ Beth Slovic Bslovic (February 20, 2008). "He's an ... Illegal Eh-lien". Willamette Week.
^ "Department of Homeland Security-Border Security Metrics Report-May 2018" (PDF). Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ "U.S. Unauthorized Immigration Total Lowest in a Decade". November 27, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ Burnett, John (December 5, 2017). "Arrests For Illegal Border Crossings Hit 46-Year Low". NPR. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Arrests of people trying to cross illegally into the U.S. from Mexico plunged to the lowest level since 1971
^ "Trump says illegal immigration lowest in 17 years".
^ "Illegal Border Crossings Are Down, and So is Business for Smugglers". NPR.
^ Kawashima, Masaki (2017). American History, Race and the Struggle for Equality. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1007/978-981-10-1977-7. ISBN 978-981-10-1976-0.
^ Hamilton, Nora; Chinchilla, Norma (2001). Seeking Community in a Global City: Guatemalans and Salvadorans in Los Angeles. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
^ P rez, Santiago (June 15, 2019). "Mexico Releases Terms of Migration Deal With Trump". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 27, 2019.
^ "Mexican foreign minister cites sharp decrease in immigration to U.S." Reuters. September 10, 2019. Retrieved September 11, 2019.
^ a b "Border-Crossing Deaths Have Doubled Since 1995; Border Patrol's Efforts to Prevent Deaths Have Not Been Fully Evaluated" (PDF). Government Accountability Office. August 2006. p. 42.
^ "Sharp rise in Chinese arrests at U.S. border". Los Angeles Times. October 5, 2009.
^ Keefe, Patrick Radden (2009). "Snakeheads and Smuggling: The Dynamics of Illegal Chinese Immigration". World Policy Journal. 26 (1): 33 44. doi:10.1162/wopj.2009.26.1.33. JSTOR 40210104.
^ Alexandra Marks (February 5, 2002). "A harder look at visa overstayers". Christian Science Monitor.
^ Jacobson, Louis (March 15, 2017). "Is being in the United States unlawfully a 'crime'?". Politifact. Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved January 18, 2020.
^ "Immigration: The Demographic and Economic Facts". Cato.org. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2012.
^ "Nearly Half of Illegal Immigrants Overstay Visas". NPR. June 14, 2006. Retrieved January 2, 2012.
^ "Immigration | Visa Overstay and Illegal Presence in the US | ISSS | Temple University". Archived from the original on October 21, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2016.
^ a b c Jonas, Susanne; Rodr guez, N stor (2015). Guatemala-U.S. Migration: Transforming Regions. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-76314-2.[page needed]
^ a b c Gonzales, A.R.; Strange, D.N.; Bakken, G.M. (2014). A Conservative and Compassionate Approach to Immigration Reform: Perspectives from a Former US Attorney General. Texas Tech University Press. ISBN 978-0-89672-897-4.[page needed]
^ Schreiber, Rebecca (2018). The Undocumented Everyday: Migrant Lives and the Politics of Visibility. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 9781452956398.
^ a b c d e Anderson, Oliver C. (2010). Illegal Immigration: Causes, Methods, and Effects. New York: Nova Science Publishers. ISBN 978-1-61668-033-6.
^ a b c d e f Orrenius, Pia (June 1, 2014). "Enforcement and illegal migration". IZA World of Labor. doi:10.15185/izawol.81.
^ Hanson, Gordon H; Spilimbergo, Antonio (December 1999). "Illegal Immigration, Border Enforcement, and Relative Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico Border". American Economic Review. 89 (5): 1337 1357. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.30.6926. doi:10.1257/aer.89.5.1337. S2CID 153837741.
^ "No Childhood Here: Why Central American Children are Fleeing Their Homes". American Immigration Council. August 24, 2016. Retrieved September 5, 2017.
^ Neli Esipova, Julie Ray, and Anita Pugliese, Number of potential migrants worldwide tops 700 million Gallup, June 8, 2017.
^ Buechner, Maryanne; Ferguson, Sarah (October 16, 2018). "Why Migrants Flee Central America". UNICEF USA.
^ Meyer, Peter J. (December 12, 2022). Central American Migration: Root Causes and U.S. Policy (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service.
^ a b c d e f Gans, Judith (February 2007). "Illegal Immigration to the United States: Causes and Policy Solutions" (PDF). Udall Center for Studies in Public Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 5, 2016.
^ a b c d Chiswick, Barry R. (1988). "Illegal Immigration and Immigration Control (Summer, 1988)". The Journal of Economic Perspectives (PDF). 2 (3): 101 115. doi:10.1257/jep.2.3.101.
^ Kelly Lytle Hern ndez, "The Crimes and Consequences of Illegal Immigration: A Cross-Border Examination of Operation Wetback, 1943 1954." The Western Historical Quarterly vol. 37, no. 4, (Winter 2006), p. 423
^ University, Stanford (May 14, 2018). "Analyzing undocumented Mexican migration in U.S." Stanford News. Retrieved October 26, 2020.
^ a b Jost, Kenneth. "Immigration Conflict: Should States Crack down on Unlawful Aliens? Archived March 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine" The CQ Researcher Online 22.10 (1923): n.p. CQ Researcher by CQ Press. March 9, 2012. Web. October 25, 2012.
^ Louis Uchitelle (February 18, 2007). "Nafta Should Have Stopped Illegal Immigration, Right?". The New York Times. Retrieved May 5, 2010.
^ "Mexican migrants to get US maps". BBC News. January 25, 2006. Retrieved January 2, 2012.
^ "Mexican State Issues 'How To' on Border Jumping". Fox News. March 23, 2005.
^ a b Iliff, Laurence (January 7, 2005). "Mexico offers tips for crossing border in comic book". The Seattle Times.
^ "24 California Marines Kicked Out Over Smuggling and Drug Charges". Gina Harkins. February 8, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ "2 Marines charged after trying to smuggle undocumented immigrants: Court records". Elizabeth McLaughlin. July 10, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ "16 Marines Arrested for Alleged Human Smuggling, Drug-Related Offenses". Gidget Fuentes. July 25, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ "18 US Marines, one sailor arrested for alleged crimes including human smuggling and drug-related offenses". By Zachary Cohen and Barbara Starr. July 27, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ "Marine private first class accused of attempting to smuggle two Chinese women into the United States". Phiplip Athey. December 11, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ "Man Charged After Marines Allege He Recruited Them for Smuggling Operations". Gina Harkins. February 6, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ "13 Marines charged with offenses related to alleged human smuggling operations". Shawn Snow. September 20, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ "First two Marines arrested in massive Camp Pendleton human smuggling ring get prison time". Paul Szoldra. March 18, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2021). "Table 39. Aliens Removed Or Returned: Fiscal Years 1892 To 2019". dhs.gov. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. DHS explanation: "Removals are the compulsory and confirmed movement of an inadmissible or deportable alien out of the United States based on an order of removal. An alien who is removed has administrative or criminal consequences placed on subsequent reentry owing to the fact of the removal. Returns are the confirmed movement of an inadmissible or deportable alien out of the United States not based on an order of removal."
^ The New Americans: Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. The National Academies Press. 1997. p. 21. doi:10.17226/5779. ISBN 978-0-309-06356-2.
^ "  1325. Improper entry by alien". Cornell Law School. Retrieved July 30, 2010.
^ a b Laura Jarrett, Are undocumented immigrants committing a crime? Not necessarily, CNN (February 24, 2017).
^ Modes of Entry for the Unauthorized Migrant Population, Pew Hispanic Center (May 22, 2016).
^ Temple University, Visa Overstay and Illegal Presence in the US, Temple University, accessed January 17, 2019.
^ Richard Gonzales, For 7th Consecutive Year, Visa Overstays Exceeded Illegal Border Crossings, NPR (January 16, 2019).
^ Elizabeth Redden, Violate Your Student Visa? You're Not Welcome Here, Inside Higher Ed (May 15, 2018).
^ Ashley Cleek, The complicated reasons why some people overstay their US visas, The World, PRI (October 25, 2017).
^ Megan Davy, Deborah W. Meyers & Jeanne Batalova, Who Does What in U.S. Immigration, Migration Information Source, Migration Policy institute (December 1, 2005).
^ Jessica Saunders, Nelson Lim & Don Prosnitz, Enforcing Immigration Law at the State and Local Levels: A Public Policy Dilemma, RAND Corporation (2010).
^ a b Archibold, Randal C. (April 24, 2010). "U.S.'s Toughest Immigration Law Is Signed in Arizona". The New York Times. p. A1.
^ Archibold, Randal C. (July 29, 2010). "Judge Blocks Arizona's Immigration Law". The New York Times. p. A1.
^ a b c Adam Liptak Blocking Parts of Arizona Law, Justices Allow Its Centerpiece, New York Times (June 26, 2012).
^ a b Duara, Nigel (September 15, 2017). "Arizona's Once-Feared Immigration Law, SB 1070, Loses Most of Its Power in Settlement". Los Angeles Times.
^ 8 U.S.C. 1621
^ Medina, Jennifer (January 2, 2014). "Allowed to Join the Bar, but Not to Take a Job". The New York Times. Retrieved June 1, 2014.
^ "State E-Verify Action". National Conference of State Legislatures. August 15, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2023.
^ Orrenius, Pia M.; Zavodny, Madeline (April 1, 2015). "The impact of E-Verify mandates on labor market outcomes". Southern Economic Journal. 81 (4): 947 959. doi:10.1002/soej.12023. ISSN 2325-8012.
^ Preston, Julia (October 2, 2007). "Court Orders a New Delay on Illegal Worker Rules". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2012.
^ "Illegal Hiring is Rarely Penalized". The Washington Post WashingtonPost.com Archived November 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, June 19, 2006
^ Wal-Mart to Pay $11 Million: Chain Settles Illegal-Worker Investigation WashingtonPost.com Archived December 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, March 19, 2005
^ Immigration raid linked to ID theft, Chertoff says (USA Today) December 13, 2006. Archived October 25, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Because Swift uses a government Basic Pilot program to confirm whether Social Security numbers are valid, no charges were filed against Swift. Company officials have questioned the program's ability to detect when two people are using the same number.
^ Enforcing Corporate Responsibility for Violations of Workplace Immigration Laws: The Case of Meatpacking Harvard.edu Archived December 29, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, December 22, 2006. Tyson also used its enrollment in the Basic Pilot and EVP Programs (voluntary employment eligibility screening programs) as part of its defense.
^ The New York Times, July 9, 2010, by Julia Preston, "Illegal Workers Swept From Jobs in 'Silent Raids'"
^ Bernstein, Nina. "In-Custody Deaths". The New York Times. Retrieved May 5, 2010.
^ Anil Kalhan (2010), "Rethinking Immigration Detention", Columbia Law Review Sidebar, 110: 42 58, SSRN 1556867
^ Nina Bernstein (August 12, 2008). "Ill and in Pain, Detainee Dies in U.S. Hands". The New York Times. Retrieved August 18, 2008.
^ "deportation (law)   Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Britannica.com. Retrieved November 5, 2012.
^ Julie Watson (August 24, 2008). "Mexicans deported from US face shattered lives". USA Today. Associated Press.
^ Slevin, Peter (July 25, 2010). "Deportation of illegal immigrants increases under Obama administration". The Washington Post. pp. A1.
^ Jim Barnett (October 18, 2011). "U.S. deportations reach historic levels". CNN. Retrieved October 18, 2011.
^ The New York Times: "Seeing Citizenship Path Near, Activists Push Obama to Slow Deportations" by Michael D. Schear Archived May 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine February 22, 2013
^ "Obama Has Deported More People Than Any Other President". ABC News. October 19, 2016.
^ a b Morawetz, N. (2000). "Understanding the Impact of the 1996 Deportation Laws and the Limited Scope of Proposed Reforms". Harvard Law Review. 113 (8): 1936 62. doi:10.2307/1342314. JSTOR 1342314.
^ Sinnar, S. (2003). "Patriotic or Unconstitutional? The Mandatory Detention of Aliens under the USA Patriot Act". Stanford Law Review. 55 (4): 1419 56. JSTOR 1229608.
^ "39 Harvard Journal on Legislation 2002 "USA Patriot Act Recent Developments"". Heinonline.org. Retrieved November 5, 2012.
^ Lee, Margaret (May 12, 2006). "U.S. Citizenship of Persons Born in the United States to Alien Parents" (PDF). Congressional Research Service Report for Congress. pp. 10, 17. Retrieved August 16, 2008.
^ a b Passel, Jeffrey (March 7, 2006). "The Size and Characteristics of the Unauthorized Migrant Population in the US" (PDF). Pew Hispanic Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2008. Retrieved August 20, 2008.
^ Sinnar, Shirin (2003). "55 Stanford Law Review 2002 2003 Patriotic or Unconstitutional   The Mandatory Detention of Aliens under the USA Patriot Act Note". Stanford Law Review. 55: 1419. Retrieved November 5, 2012.
^ For more information please visit "Humanitarian Visas". Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
^ a b c U.S. urged to apologize for 1930s deportations Archived April 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Wendy Koch, USA Today, May 4, 2006
^ Kelly Lytle Hern ndez, "The Crimes and Consequences of Illegal Immigration: A Cross-Border Examination of Operation Wetback, 1943 1954," The Western Historical Quarterly, vol. 37, no. 4, (Winter 2006), p. 425.
^ a b Timeline: 1953 Operation Wetback: The U.S. Immigration Service deports more than 3.8 million people of Mexican heritage. Archived May 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine The Border Archived May 3, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, PBS
^ "A Reagan Legacy: Amnesty For Illegal Immigrants". NPR: National Public Radio. July 4, 2010
"A Reagan Legacy: Amnesty For Illegal Immigrants". NPR. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2010.
^ Hagan, J.; Eschbach, K.; Rodriguez, N. (2008). "U.S. Deportation Policy, Family Separation, and Circular Migration". International Migration Review. 42: 64. doi:10.1111/j.1747-7379.2007.00114.x. S2CID 145761772.
^ Isacson, Adam and Maureen Meyer. "Dangerous Deportation Practices that put Migrants at Risk. Archived February 27, 2014, at the Wayback Machine" Washington Office on Latin America, June 4, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2013.
^ Schlanger, Margo (November 25, 2014). "A Civil Rights Lawyer Explains Why Obama's Immigration Order Is an Even Bigger Deal Than It Seems". New Republic. Retrieved January 30, 2015.
^ a b c d e Louise Radnofsky, U.S. Deportations Rise, but Remain Below Peak in Obama Era, Wall Street Journal (March 21, 2019).
^ Julia Preston, Deportation Up in 2013; Border Sites Were Focus, New York Times (October 1, 2014).
^ Ana Gonzales-Barrera & Jens Manuel Krogstad, U.S. immigrant deportations declined in 2014, but remain near record high, Pew Research Center (August 31, 2016).
^ a b c Lindsey Bever & Deanna Paul, Deportations under Trump are on the rise but still lower than Obama's, ICE report shows, Washington Post (December 14, 2018).
^ a b Darryl Fears (July 26, 2005). "$41 Billion Cost Projected To Remove Illegal Entrants". Washington Times.
^ Warren, Robert; Kerwin, Donald (2017). "Mass Deportations Would Impoverish US Families and Create Immense Social Costs". Journal on Migration and Human Security. 5: 1 8. doi:10.1177/233150241700500101. S2CID 219950152.
^ Posse Comitatus Act Not Dated
^ Border Skirmish Time.com Archived July 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, August 25, 1997
^ "On the Border". Hartford Advocate. June 30, 2008. Archived from the original on July 15, 2008. Retrieved July 11, 2008.
^ "About the Film The Ballad of Esequiel Hern ndez". PBS. July 7, 2008. Retrieved July 11, 2008.
^ The Myth of Posse Comitatus October 2000 Archived February 9, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
^ House panel plans probe of S. Texas border killing DPFT.org Archived September 23, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, July 17, 1997
^ Pentagon Pulls Troops Off Drug Patrols Action Comes as Grand Jury Weighs Indictment of Marine DPFT.org Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, July 30, 1997
^ National Guard presence cutting number of illegal US-Mexico border crossings PITT.edu Archived June 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, June 12, 2006
^ Bush Set To Send Guard to Border WashingtonPost.com Archived December 7, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, May 15, 2006
^ President Bush Addresses the Nation on Immigration Reform Archives.gov Archived May 7, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, May 2006
^ ACLU Calls on President Not to Deploy Military Troops to Deter Immigrants at the Mexican Border ACLU.org Archived October 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, May 5, 2006
^ President Bush's Plan For Comprehensive Immigration Reform 2007 State of the Union Archived November 15, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Comprehensive Immigration Reform". whitehouse.gov.
^ National Guard works the border SFgate.com Archived December 13, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, October 23, 2006
^ a b Lee, Jasmine C.; Omri, Rudy; Preston, Julia (September 3, 2016). "What Are Sanctuary Cities?". The New York Times.
^ "Mayor Newsom launches sanctuary city outreach program" Archived February 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, City and County of San Francisco, Office of the Mayor. April 2, 2008. Retrieved October 10, 2009.
^ Enforcing Immigration Law: The Role of State and Local Law Enforcement Archived November 26, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Congressional Research Service report, August 14, 2006, page 26
^ PressReader https://www.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20151021/281633894087281/TextView. Retrieved May 21, 2020. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Narea, Nicole (February 14, 2020). "Trump is sending armed tactical forces to arrest immigrants in sanctuary cities". Vox. Retrieved June 18, 2020.
^ "Extremists Declare 'Open Season' on Immigrants". Anti-Defamation League. April 26, 2006. Archived from the original on February 5, 2007.
^ "No More Deaths".
^ "'Dreamer Moms' fast near White House, hoping Obama will grant them legal status". The Washington Post. November 12, 2014.
^ "Meet the Young Ecuadorians Behind the First Kichwa-Language Radio Show in the US". Remezcla. December 23, 2016. Retrieved October 6, 2019.
^ Kossoudji, Sherrie A.; Cobb Clark, Deborah A. (July 1, 2002). "Coming out of the Shadows: Learning about Legal Status and Wages from the Legalized Population". Journal of Labor Economics. 20 (3): 598 628. doi:10.1086/339611. S2CID 154000004.
^ Edwards, Ryan; Ortega, Francesc (2017). "The Economic Contribution of Unauthorized Workers: An Industry Analysis" (PDF). Regional Science and Urban Economics. 67: 119 134. doi:10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2017.09.004. hdl:10419/149225. S2CID 7870192.
^ a b Pope, Nolan G. (November 1, 2016). "The Effects of DACAmentation: The Impact of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals on Unauthorized Immigrants". Journal of Public Economics. 143: 98 114. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2016.08.014.
^ Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina; Antman, Francisca (2016). "Can authorization reduce poverty among undocumented immigrants? Evidence from the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program". Economics Letters. 147: 1 4. doi:10.1016/j.econlet.2016.08.001. hdl:10419/145279. S2CID 157258420.
^ Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina; Arenas-Arroyo, Esther; Sevilla, Almudena (2018). "Immigration enforcement and economic resources of children with likely unauthorized parents". Journal of Public Economics. 158: 63 78. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2017.12.004. S2CID 158175416.
^ Palivos, Theodore (January 1, 2009). "Welfare effects of illegal immigration" (PDF). Journal of Population Economics. 22 (1): 131 144. doi:10.1007/s00148-007-0182-3. S2CID 154625546.
^ Chassamboulli, Andri; Peri, Giovanni (October 1, 2015). "The labor market effects of reducing the number of illegal immigrants". Review of Economic Dynamics. 18 (4): 792 821. doi:10.1016/j.red.2015.07.005. S2CID 16242107.
^ "How Immigrants Affect California Employment and Wages (PPIC Publication)". Ppic.org. Retrieved February 7, 2013.
^ Hanson, Gordon H.; Robertson, Raymond; Spilimbergo, Antonio (2002). "Does Border Enforcement Protect U.S. Workers from Illegal Immigration?". Review of Economics and Statistics. 84 (1): 73 92. doi:10.1162/003465302317331937.
^ Albert, Christoph (2021). "The Labor Market Impact of Immigration: Job Creation versus Job Competition". American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 13 (1): 35 78. doi:10.1257/mac.20190042. S2CID 210054914.
^ "The Economic Logic of Illegal Immigration". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
^ a b c d Watson, Tara (March 28, 2018). "Do Undocumented Immigrants Overuse Government Benefits?". Econofact.
^ "Fact check: How much does illegal immigration cost? Not nearly as much as Trump claims". NBC News. Retrieved May 20, 2020.
^ Lipman, J.; Francine, J. (Spring 2006). "Taxing Undocumented Immigrants: Separate, Unequal and Without Representation". The Tax Lawyer. SSRN 881584. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Also published in Harvard Latino Law Review Archived November 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Spring 2006.
^ Zallman, Leah; Wilson, Fernando A.; Stimpson, James P.; Bearse, Adriana; Arsenault, Lisa; Dube, Blessing; Himmelstein, David; Woolhandler, Steffie (January 2016). "Unauthorized Immigrants Prolong the Life of Medicare's Trust Fund". Journal of General Internal Medicine. 31 (1): 122 127. doi:10.1007/s11606-015-3418-z. PMC 4699990. PMID 26084972.
^ Banks help illegal immigrants own their own home Archived December 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, CNN/Money
^ Orrenius, Pia; Zavodny, Madeline (July 2, 2019). "Do Immigrants Threaten US Public Safety?". Journal on Migration and Human Security. 7 (3): 52 61. doi:10.1177/2331502419857083. There are relatively few studies specifically of criminal behavior among unauthorized immigrants, but the limited research suggests that these immigrants also have a lower propensity to commit crime than their native-born peers, although possibly a higher propensity than legal immigrants.
^ Flagg, Anna (September 23, 2019). "Deportations Reduce Crime? That's Not What the Evidence Shows". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2019.
^ Nakamura, David (February 28, 2017). "Trump calls for creation of office to support victims of crimes by illegal immigrants". Washington Post. Retrieved May 4, 2017.
^ "Crime, Corrections, and California: What Does Immigration Have to Do with It? (PPIC Publication)". www.ppic.org. Retrieved June 23, 2016.
^ Carroll, Lauren (July 6, 2015). "Trump immigration claim has no data to back it up". PolitiFact. Retrieved August 22, 2017. ... every expert we polled said there is a consensus among scholars that undocumented immigrants are not more likely to commit crimes than U.S. citizens.
^ Spenkuch, J rg L. (June 2, 2014). "Does Immigration Increase Crime?". Retrieved June 23, 2016.
^ Light, Michael T.; Miller, TY (2018). "Does Undocumented Immigration Increase Violent Crime?". Criminology. 56 (2): 370 401. doi:10.1111/1745-9125.12175. PMC 6241529. PMID 30464356.
^ Gunadi, Christian (2019). "On the association between undocumented immigration and crime in the United States". Oxford Economic Papers. 73: 200 224. doi:10.1093/oep/gpz057.
^ Green, David (May 1, 2016). "The Trump Hypothesis: Testing Immigrant Populations as a Determinant of Violent and Drug-Related Crime in the United States". Social Science Quarterly. 97 (3): 506 524. doi:10.1111/ssqu.12300.
^ Light, Michael T.; Miller, Ty; Kelly, Brian C. (July 20, 2017). "Undocumented Immigration, Drug Problems, and Driving Under the Influence in the United States, 1990 2014". American Journal of Public Health. 107 (9): e1 e7. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2017.303884. PMC 5551598. PMID 28727520.
^ Lueders, Hans; Hainmueller, Jens; Lawrence, Duncan (April 18, 2017). "Providing driver's licenses to unauthorized immigrants in California improves traffic safety". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 114 (16): 4111 4116. Bibcode:2017PNAS..114.4111L. doi:10.1073/pnas.1618991114. PMC 5402447. PMID 28373538.
^ Matthew, Freedman; Emily, Owens; Sarah, Bohn (2018). "Immigration, Employment Opportunities, and Criminal Behavior". American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 10 (2): 117 151. doi:10.1257/pol.20150165.
^ "Immigration, Employment Opportunities, and Criminal Behavior" (PDF).
^ Garcia, Eric (September 21, 2018). "Yale, MIT study: 22 million, not 11 million, undocumented immigrants in US". The Hill. Retrieved December 28, 2018.
^ "Is There a Connection Between Undocumented Immigrants and Crime?". The Marshall Project. May 13, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2019.
^ Light, Michael T.; Thomas, Julia T. (December 9, 2020). "Undocumented immigration and terrorism: Is there a connection?". Social Science Research. 94: 102512. doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2020.102512. PMC 7926034. PMID 33648683.
^ a b c Ciancio, Alberto (January 1, 2017). "The Impact Of Immigration Policies On Local Enforcement, Crime And Policing Efficiency". Publicly Accessible Penn Dissertations.
^ Gathmann, Christina (October 1, 2008). "Effects of enforcement on illegal markets: Evidence from migrant smuggling along the southwestern border". Journal of Public Economics. 92 (10): 1926 1941. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.04.006. hdl:10419/20239. S2CID 7856835.
^ Massey, Douglas S.; Durand, Jorge; Pren, Karen A. (March 1, 2016). "Why Border Enforcement Backfired". American Journal of Sociology. 121 (5): 1557 1600. doi:10.1086/684200. PMC 5049707. PMID 27721512.
^ "Immigrants' Deportations, Local Crime and Police Effectiveness". www.iza.org. Retrieved June 30, 2019.
^ Gonzalez, Benjamin; Collingwood, Loren; El-Khatib, Stephen Omar (2019). "The Politics of Refuge: Sanctuary Cities, Crime, and Undocumented Immigration". Urban Affairs Review. 55: 3 40. doi:10.1177/1078087417704974. S2CID 32604699.
^ Loren Collingwood, Benjamin Gonzalez-O'Brien & Stephen El-Khatib Oct (October 3, 2016). "Sanctuary cities do not experience an increase in crime". Washington Post.
^ "Is Philly's sanctuary city status putting residents in danger?". @politifact. Retrieved April 23, 2017.
^ "No Evidence Sanctuary Cities 'Breed Crime'". FactCheck.org. February 10, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017.
^ "Trump's claim that sanctuary cities 'breed crime'". Washington Post. Retrieved April 23, 2017.
^ "Analysis | Jeff Sessions used our research to claim that sanctuary cities have more crime. He's wrong". Washington Post. Retrieved July 14, 2017.
^ "Academics push back against attorney general's misrepresentation of their study". Retrieved July 17, 2017.
^ Mart nez-Schuldt, Ricardo D.; Mart nez, Daniel E. (December 18, 2017). "Sanctuary Policies and City-Level Incidents of Violence, 1990 to 2010". Justice Quarterly. 36 (4): 567 593. doi:10.1080/07418825.2017.1400577. S2CID 53056328.
^ Dhingra, Reva; Kilborn, Mitchell; Woldemikael, Olivia (September 2022). "Immigration Policies and Access to the Justice System: The Effect of Enforcement Escalations on Undocumented Immigrants and Their Communities". Political Behavior. 44 (3): 1359 1387. doi:10.1007/s11109-020-09663-w. S2CID 230110063.
^ Mart nez-Schuldt, Ricardo D.; Mart nez, Daniel E. (February 2021). "Immigrant Sanctuary Policies and Crime-Reporting Behavior: A Multilevel Analysis of Reports of Crime Victimization to Law Enforcement, 1980 to 2004". American Sociological Review. 86 (1): 154 185. doi:10.1177/0003122420978406. S2CID 231681112.
^ a b "The Effects of Sanctuary Policies on Crime and the Economy". Center for American Progress. January 26, 2017.
^ "Crime and Poverty Are Lower in Sanctuary Cities". CityLab. Retrieved February 6, 2017.
^ "Do Apprehensions of Undocumented Immigrants Reduce Crime and Create Jobs? Evidence from U.S. Districts, 2000-2015" (PDF). UC Davis Law Review. 2018.
^ Coronado, Roberto; Orrenius, Pia M. (2003). "The impact of illegal immigration and enforcement on border crime rates". Working Papers.
^ "Do Immigrants Cost Native-Born Taxpayers Money?". Econofact. July 26, 2017. Retrieved September 5, 2017.
^ Leland, John (September 4, 2006). "Immigrants stealing U.S. Social Security numbers for jobs, not profits". The New York Times   International Herald Tribune. Retrieved January 10, 2020.
^ "Kansas case puts face on growing problem of 'total identity theft' by illegal immigrants". Associated Press. March 26, 2015. Retrieved January 10, 2020.
^ Hegeman, Roxana (January 9, 2008). "Illegal immigrants turn to identity theft". MSNBC. Retrieved January 10, 2020.
^ Liptak, Adam; Preston, Julia (May 4, 2009). "Justices Limit Use of Identity Theft Law in Immigration Cases". The New York Times.
^ a b c Garibay, J.; Herrera, C.; Johnston-Guerrero, F.; Garcia, A. (2016). "Layers of influence: exploring institutional-and state-level effects on college student views toward access to public education for undocumented immigrants". Research in Higher Education. 57 (5): 601 629. doi:10.1007/s11162-015-9400-0. S2CID 147053922.
^ a b Gonzales, Roberto G. (2010). "On the Wrong Side of the Tracks: Understanding the Effects of School Structure and Social Capital in the Educational Pursuits of Undocumented Immigrant Students". Peabody Journal of Education. 85 (4): 469 485. doi:10.1080/0161956x.2010.518039. JSTOR 25759044. S2CID 145290313.
^ Abrego, L. J. (2008). "Legitimacy, social identity, and the mobilization of law The effects of Assembly Bill 540 on undocumented students in California". Law & Social Inquiry. 33 (3): 709 734. doi:10.1111/j.1747-4469.2008.00119.x. S2CID 145130781.
^ a b American Immigration Council. (2012). Public education for immigrant students: States challenge Supreme Court s decision in Plyler v. Doe. Retrieved from http://www.immigrationpolicy.org/just-facts/public-education-immigrant-students-states-challenge-supreme-court s-decision-plyler-v-do Archived August 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
^ a b c d e f g h i Crawford, E (2018). "When Boundaries Around the "Secret" are Tested: A School Community Response to the Policing of Undocumented Immigrants". Education and Urban Society. 50 (2): 155 182. doi:10.1177/0013124517690227. S2CID 152032675.
^ American Federation of Teachers. (2016). Immigrant and refugee children: A guide for
educators and school support staff. Retrieved from https://www.aft.org/sites/default/files/im_uac-educators-guide_2016.pdf
^ National Juvenile Justice Network. (2018). Protecting immigrant youth fact sheet. Retrieved From https://www.ilrc.org/sites/default/files/resources/protect_immig_youth-20181217.pdf
^ Borkowski, J. W. (2009). Legal issues for school districts related to the education of undocumented children. Alexandria, VA: "National School Boards Association" Retrieved from https://brycs.org/clearinghouse/2785/
^ Roth, B. J. (2017). "When college is illegal: Undocumented Latino/a youth and mobilizing social support for educational attainment in South Carolina". Journal of the Society for Social Work and Research. 8 (4): 539 561. doi:10.1086/694325. S2CID 149438441.
^ Raza, S. S.; Saravia, L. A.; Katsiaficas, D. (2018). "Coming out: Examining how undocumented students critically navigate status disclosure processes". Journal of Diversity in Higher Education. 12 (3): 191 204. doi:10.1037/dhe0000085. S2CID 149924459.
^ MARTIN, JERRY  BRIAN  (October 1, 2019). "Commentary: How 1994's Operation Gatekeeper made Border Patrol better and ended the 'chaos'". San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved October 1, 2019.
^ a b Roberto Martinez (In Motion Magazine), "Operation Gatekeeper" InMotionMagazine.com Archived January 19, 2000, at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved: July 4, 2008.
^ a b "Coroner: Meth played role in Mexican border stun gun death". San Diego News Network. June 2, 2010. Archived from the original on June 6, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010.
^ "PBS Need to Know, Crossing the Line". PBS. April 20, 2012. Retrieved July 22, 2012.
^ Archibold, Randal C. (February 28, 2008). "Border Patrol Agent's Trial in Killing of Illegal Immigrant Starts in Arizona". The New York Times. Retrieved May 5, 2010.
^ Meyer, Maureen. "Are migrants routinely abused by Customs and Border Protection agents?". Border Fact Check. Washington Office on Latin America. Retrieved September 24, 2012.
^ Hainmueller, Jens; Lawrence, Duncan; Mart n, Linna; Black, Bernard; Figueroa, Lucila; Hotard, Michael; Jim nez, Tom s R.; Mendoza, Fernando; Rodriguez, Maria I. (August 31, 2017). "Protecting unauthorized immigrant mothers improves their children's mental health". Science. 357 (6355): 1041 1044. Bibcode:2017Sci...357.1041H. doi:10.1126/science.aan5893. PMC 5990252. PMID 28860206.
^ Venkataramani, Atheendar S; Shah, Sachin J; O'Brien, Rourke; Kawachi, Ichiro; Tsai, Alexander C (2017). "Health consequences of the US Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) immigration programme: a quasi-experimental study". The Lancet Public Health. 2 (4): e175 e181. doi:10.1016/s2468-2667(17)30047-6. PMC 6378686. PMID 29253449.
^ Luo, Tianyuan; Escalante, Cesar L. (January 2021). "Stringent immigration enforcement and the mental health and health risk behaviors of Hispanic adolescent students in Arizona". Health Economics. 30 (1): 86 103. doi:10.1002/hec.4178. PMID 33085153. S2CID 212682062.
^ a b c Ornelas, India J.; Yamanis, Thespina J.; Ruiz, Raymond A. (2020). "The Health of Undocumented Latinx Immigrants: What We Know and Future Directions". Annual Review of Public Health. 41: 289 308. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-040119-094211. PMC 9246400. PMID 32237989.
^ Swartz, Jonas J.; Hainmueller, Jens; Lawrence, Duncan; Rodriguez, Maria I. (2017). "Expanding Prenatal Care to Unauthorized Immigrant Women and the Effects on Infant Health". Obstetrics and Gynecology. 130 (5): 938 945. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000002275. PMC 5679477. PMID 29016491.
^ "Looking for a Hidden Population: Trafficking of Migrant Laborers in San Diego County" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 29, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2020.
^ Many of these women are forced in to heavy labor to pay for their passage into the U.S. PBS Report on Illegal Immigrant Slavery in the US Archived September 24, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
^ Modern slavery thriving in the U.S. Archived October 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved: March 5, 2008
^ Fox News Latino: "US 'Network of Pimps' Indicted for Enslaving Dozens of Latina Immigrants Archived September 28, 2015, at the Wayback Machine January 18, 2013
^ Rosagel, Shaila (September 9, 2015). "Muerte, trata, violaci n  el drama de migrantes en M xico es peor que el de Europa: ONGs". Resumen Latinoamericano (in Spanish). Retrieved February 12, 2020.
^ "'Train of death' drives migrant American dreamers". CNN. June 25, 2010.
^ Nieves, Evelyn (August 6, 2002). "Illegal Immigrant Death Rate Rises Sharply in Barren Areas". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 18, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2009.
^ Crossing Over: A Mexican Family on the Migrant Trail Archived March 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, review by Carol Amoruso.
^ Flynn, Michael A.; Eggerth, Donald E.; Jacobson, C. Jeffrey (September 1, 2015). "Undocumented status as a social determinant of occupational safety and health: The workers' perspective". American Journal of Industrial Medicine. 58 (11): 1127 1137. doi:10.1002/ajim.22531. PMC 4632487. PMID 26471878.
^ Liebman, Amy King; Juarez-Carrillo, Patricia Margarita; Reyes, Iris Anne Cruz; Keifer, Matthew Charles (March 1, 2016). "Immigrant dairy workers' perceptions of health and safety on the farm in America's Heartland". American Journal of Industrial Medicine. 59 (3): 227 235. doi:10.1002/ajim.22538. PMID 26523613.
^ "My Very Unhappy Birthday". This American Life. July 13, 2019. Retrieved January 22, 2021.
^ "Private prison companies served with lawsuits over using detainee labor". The Guardian. November 25, 2018. Retrieved January 22, 2021.
^ "U.S. Commission on Civil Rights Concerned with Alleged Abusive Labor Practices at Immigration Detention Centers" (PDF). United States Civil Rights Commission. December 21, 2017.
^ a b c Wong, Sydney (2021). "Influencing Immigration: The Need for Immigration Reform in the Age of Social Media Influencers". Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law Review. Los Angeles: Loyola Marymount University. 42 (1).
^ O'Connor, John J. (June 14, 1996). "TV Weeknd; 9 African Stowaways And a Homicidal Crew". The New York Times.
^ "Immigrationprof Blog: Acclaimed Political Documentary Series 'How Democracy Works Now' Announces Washington D.C. Screenings". Film in Current Affairs. Lawprofessors.typepad.com. May 3, 2010. Retrieved September 22, 2011.
Further reading
Barkan, Elliott R. "Return of the Nativists? California Public Opinion and Immigration in the 1980s and 1990s".  Social Science History 2003 27(2): 229 283. online
Borjas, G.J. 1994. "The economics of immigration." Journal of Economic Literature (32):1667 717.
Brimelow, Peter; Alien Nation (1996)
Chac n, Jennifer M.  Criminal Law & Migration Control: Recent History & Future Possibilities.  Daedalus 151#1 (2022), pp. 121 34. online
Cull, Nicholas J. and Carrasco, Dav d, ed.  Alambrista and the US-Mexico Border: Film, Music, and Stories of Undocumented Immigrants U. of New Mexico Press, 2004. 225 pp.
De La Torre, Miguel A., Trails of Hope and Terror: Testimonies on Immigration. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Press, 2009.
Dowling, Julie A., and Jonathan Xavier Inda, eds. Governing Immigration Through Crime: A Reader. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2013.
Espenshade, Thomas J (1995). "Unauthorized Immigration to the United States". Annual Review of Sociology. 21: 195 216. doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.21.1.195. PMID 12291061.
Flores, William V (2003). "New Citizens, New Rights: Undocumented Immigrants and Latino Cultural Citizenship". Latin American Perspectives. 30 (2): 87 100. doi:10.1177/0094582X02250630. S2CID 143873638.
Gratton, Brian, and Emily Merchant.  Immigration, Repatriation, and Deportation: The Mexican-Origin Population in the United States, 1920 1950.  International Migration Revie 47#3 2013, pp. 944 75. online.
Gravelle, Timothy B. "Politics, time, space, and attitudes toward US Mexico border security." Political Geography 65 (2018): 107 116. online
Hirota, Hidetaka. Expelling the Poor: Atlantic Seaboard States and the Nineteenth-Century Origins of American Immigration Policy ( Oxford University Press, 2017).
Hopkins, Daniel J.  Politicized Places: Explaining Where and When Immigrants Provoke Local Opposition.  American Political Science Review 104#1 (2010), pp. 40 60. online
Inda, Jonathan Xavier. Targeting Immigrants: Government, Technology, and Ethics. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2006.
Kalhan, Anil, Rethinking Immigration Detention, 110 Columbia Law Review Sidebar 42, 2010
Kalhan, Anil, Immigration Policing and Federalism Through the Lens of Technology, Surveillance, and Privacy, 74 Ohio State Law Journal 1105, 2013
Kuczewski, Mark G. PhD; Brubaker, Linda MD, MS (2014). "Medical Education for "Dreamers": Barriers and Opportunities for Undocumented Immigrants". Academic Medicine. 89 (12): 1593 1598. doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000000399. PMID 24988424.
Maga a, Lisa, Straddling the Border: Immigration Policy and the INS (2003)
Ngai, Mae M. Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modern America (2004).
Ngai, Mae M. (2003). "The Strange Career of the Illegal Alien: Immigration Restriction and Deportation Policy in the United States, 1921 1965". Law and History Review. 21 (1): 69 108. doi:10.2307/3595069. JSTOR 3595069. S2CID 145344500.
Payan, Tony. The Three U.S.-Mexico Border Wars: Drugs, Immigration, and Homeland Security (2nd ed. 2016). excerpt ISBN 1440835411
Weintraub, Sidney. The illegal alien from Mexico : policy choices for an intractable issue (1980) online
Vicino, Thomas J. Suburban Crossroads: The Fight for Local Control of Immigration Policy. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2013.
Historiography and memory
Kamphoefner, Walter D. "What s New About the New Immigration? A Historian s Perspective over Two Centuries." Studia Migracyjne-Przegl d Polonijny 45.3 (173) (2019). online
External links
Federation of American Scientists: Border Security: Fences Along the U.S. International Border (a report of the Congressional Research Service issued on January 13, 2005)
Latin American Immigrations Effects on U.S. Relations from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
University of California, San Diego: Center for Comparative Immigration Studies
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 8, Aliens and Nationality
United States Code, Title 8, Aliens and Nationality
Pew Hispanic Center: The State of American Public Opinion on Immigration in Spring 2006: A Review of Major Surveys Archived April 17, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
Death at U.S.-Mexico border reflects immigration tensions Guardian Co UK
En Tren de la Muerte Archived December 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine   Dallas Observer
Immigration Offenders in the Federal Justice System Bureau of Justice Statistics
"Let's change the conversation on immigration", Pulitzer Prize winner Jose Antonio Vargas discusses "coming out" as an illegal immigrant
"The immigration law is inevitable" Eco Latino Magazine.
vteImmigration to the United States and related topicsRelevant colonial era,United States andinternational lawsColonial era
Nationality law in the American Colonies
Plantation Act 1740
18th century
Naturalization Act 1790 / 1795 / 1798
19th century
Naturalization Law 1802
Act to Encourage Immigration (1864)
Civil Rights Act of 1866
14th Amendment (1868)
Naturalization Act 1870
Page Act (1875)
Immigration Act of 1882
Chinese Exclusion (1882)
Scott Act (1888)
Immigration Act of 1891
Geary Act (1892)
1900 1949
Immigration Act 1903
Naturalization Act 1906
Gentlemen's Agreement (1907)
Immigration Act 1907
Immigration Act 1917 (Asian Barred Zone)
Immigration Act 1918
Emergency Quota Act (1921)
Cable Act (1922)
Immigration Act 1924
Tydings McDuffie Act (1934)
Filipino Repatriation Act (1935)
Nationality Act of 1940
Bracero Program (1942 1964)
Magnuson Act (1943)
War Brides Act (1945)
Alien Fianc es and Fianc s Act (1946)
Luce Celler Act (1946)
1950 1999
UN Refugee Convention (1951)
Immigration and Nationality Act 1952 / 1965
Refugee Act (1980)
Immigration Reform and Control Act (1986)
American Homecoming Act (1989)
Immigration Act 1990
Immigration and Nationality Technical Corrections Act (INTCA) 1994
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) (1996)
Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA) (1997)
American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act (ACWIA) (1998)
21st century
American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act (AC21) (2000)
Legal Immigration Family Equity Act (LIFE Act) (2000)
H-1B Visa Reform Act (2004)
Real ID Act (2005)
Secure Fence Act (2006)
DACA (2012)
Executive Order 13769 (2017)
Executive Order 13780 (2017)
Ending Discriminatory Bans on Entry to The United States (2021)
Visas and policies
Visa policy
Permanent residence
Visa Waiver Program
Temporary protected status
Asylum
Green Card Lottery
Central American Minors
US-VISIT
Security Advisory Opinion
E-Verify
Section 287(g)
National Origins Formula
Expedited removal
Detention
Family
Unaccompanied children
Trump administration family separation policy
Governmentorganizations
Department of Homeland Security
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
U.S. Border Patrol (BORTAC)
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
Executive Office for Immigration Review
Board of Immigration Appeals
Office of Refugee Resettlement
Supreme Court cases
US v. Wong Kim Ark (1898)
Ozawa v. US (1922)
US v. Bhagat Singh Thind (1923)
US v. Brignoni-Ponce (1975)
Zadvydas v. Davis (2001)
Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting (2011)
Barton v. Barr (2020)
DHS v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal. / Wolf v. Vidal (2020)
Niz-Chavez v. Garland (2021)
Sanchez v. Mayorkas (2021)
Related issuesand events
2006 protests
Brooks County, Texas
Central American migrant caravans
Economic impact
Effects
Eugenics in the United States
Guest worker program
Human trafficking
Human smuggling
Coyotaje
Immigration reduction
Immigration reform
List of people deported from the United States
Mexico United States barrier
Mexico-United States border crisis
Labor shortage
March for America
Illegal immigrant population
Reverse immigration
Unaccompanied minors from Central America
Geography
Mexico United States border
Canada United States border
United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints
Proposed legislation
DREAM Act (2001 2010)
H.R. 4437 (2005)
McCain Kennedy (2005)
Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2006
STRIVE Act (2007)
Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2007
Uniting American Families Act (2000 2013)
Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013
SAFE Act (2015)
RAISE Act (2017)
US Citizenship Act of 2021
Immigration stationsand points of entry
Angel Island
Castle Garden
East Boston
Ellis Island
Otay Mesa
San Ysidro
Sullivan's Island
Washington Avenue
Operations
"Wetback" (1954)
"Peter Pan" (1960 1962)
"Babylift" (1975)
"Gatekeeper" (1994)
"Endgame" (2003 2012)
"Front Line" (2004 2005)
"Streamline" (2005 present)
"Return to Sender" (2006 2007)
"Jump Start" (2006 2008)
"Phalanx" (2010 2016)
"Faithful Patriot" (2018 present)
State legislation
California DREAM Act (2006 2010)
Arizona SB 1070 (2010)
Alabama HB 56 (2011)
Non-governmentalorganizations
Arizona Border Recon
California Coalition for Immigration Reform
CASA of Maryland
Center for Immigration Studies
Center for Migration Studies of New York
Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles
Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform
Community Change
Federation for American Immigration Reform
Mexica Movement
Mexicans Without Borders
Migration Policy Institute
Minuteman Civil Defense Corps
Minuteman Project
National Immigration Forum
National Korean American Service & Education Consortium (NAKASEC)
Negative Population Growth
No More Deaths
NumbersUSA
Save Our State
Utah Compact
Documentaries
Borderland (TV series)
Missing in Brooks County
vteIllegal immigration by countryAngolaArgentinaAustraliaAzerbaijanBangladeshBhutanBrazilCanadaChileChinaFinlandFranceGhanaGreeceIndiaIranIsraelJapanLatviaLibyaMalaysiaMexicoNigeriaPakistanPhilippinesPortugalRussiaSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSouth AfricaSouth KoreaSyriaThailandUnited KingdomUnited StatesVietnam
vteUnited States articlesHistoryBy period
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
1991 2008
2008 present
By event
Pre-colonial era
Colonial era
Stamp Act Congress
Thirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Continental Association
United Colonies
military history
Founding Fathers
Halifax Resolves
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
American Revolution
War
Treaty of Paris
Articles of Confederation
Perpetual Union
Confederation period
American frontier
Constitution
drafting and ratification
Bill of Rights
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial evolution
Mexican American War
Civil War
Reconstruction era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
Women's suffrage
Civil rights movement
1865 1896
1896 1954
1954 1968
Spanish American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II
home front
American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
LGBT Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991 2008)
September 11 attacks
War on Terror
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Great Recession
COVID-19 pandemic
By topic
Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic
debt ceiling
Inventions
before 1890
1890 1945
1946 1991
after 1991
Military
Postal
Technological and industrial
Geography
Territory
Contiguous United States
counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains
peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky
Sierra Nevada
National Park Service
National Parks
Regions
East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western
Longest rivers
Arkansas
Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Red (South)
Rio Grande
Yukon
Time
Water supply and sanitation
World Heritage Sites
PoliticsFederalExecutive
Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
powers
Public policy
Legislative
House of Representatives
current members
Speaker
Senate
current members
President pro tempore
Vice President
Judicial
District courts
Courts of appeals
Supreme Court
Law
Bill of Rights
civil liberties
Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution
federalism
preemption
separation of powers
civil rights
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports
Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Uniformed
Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps
51st state
Political status of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico statehood movement
District of Columbia statehood movement
Elections
Electoral College
Foreign relations
foreign policy
Secession movements
(Hawaiian sovereignty movement)
Ideologies
Anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism
Local government
Parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Red states and blue states
Scandals
State government
governor
state legislature
state court
Imperial presidency
Corruption
Economy
By sector
Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Science and technology
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
by state
Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street
SocietyCulture
Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
wine
Dance
Death care
Cremation
Women
Demographics
Economic issues
affluence
eviction
home-ownership
household income
income inequality
labor unions
middle class
personal income
poverty
standard of living
wealth
Education
attainment
literacy
Family
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Great American Novel
Health
healthcare
health insurance
Holidays
Homelessness
Housing
Human rights
Languages
American English
Indigenous languages
ASL
Black American Sign Language
HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish
Literature
Media
journalism
internet
newspapers
radio
television
Music
Names
National symbols
Columbia
Mount Rushmore
Statue of Liberty
Uncle Sam
People
Philosophy
Political ideologies
Race
Religion
Sexuality
adolescent
Social class
Society
Sports
Theater
Transportation
Video games
Visual art
Social class
Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Standard of living
Issues
Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime
incarceration
Criticism of government
Discrimination
affirmative action
antisemitism
hair texture
intersex rights
Islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental issues
Environmental movement
Climate change
Environmental education
Gun politics
Healthcare
abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking
Human rights
Immigration
illegal
International rankings
National security
Mass surveillance
Terrorism
Separation of church and state
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Illegal_immigration_to_the_United_States&oldid=1148705330"