American singer and actor (1935 1977)
"Elvis" and "King of Rock and Roll" redirect here. For other uses, see Elvis (disambiguation) and King of Rock and Roll (disambiguation).
Elvis PresleyPresley in a publicity photograph for the 1957 film Jailhouse RockBornElvis Aron Presley[a](1935-01-08)January 8, 1935Tupelo, Mississippi, U.S.DiedAugust 16, 1977(1977-08-16) (aged 42)Memphis, Tennessee, U.S.Cause of deathCardiac arrestResting placeGraceland, Memphis35 2 46 N 90 1 23 W  /  35.04611 N 90.02306 W  / 35.04611; -90.02306Occupations
Singer
actor
Works
Albums
singles
songs recorded
Sun label
film and television
SpousePriscilla Beaulieu
   (m. 1967; div. 1973) ChildrenLisa MarieRelativesRiley Keough (granddaughter)Brandon Presley (second cousin)Awards
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (1986)
Presidential Medal of Freedom (2018)
Musical careerGenres
Rock and roll
pop
rockabilly
country
gospel
R&B
blues
Instruments
Vocals
guitar
piano
Years active1953 1977Labels
Sun
RCA Victor
HMV
Allied Artists Music Group
Musical artistMilitary service[1]BranchUnited States ArmyYears of service1958 1960RankSergeantUnitHeadquarters Company, 1st Medium Tank Battalion, 32d Armor, 3d Armored DivisionAwardsGood Conduct Medal
Elvis Aaron Presley[a] (January 8, 1935   August 16, 1977), often referred to mononymously as Elvis, was an American singer, actor and sergeant in the United States Army. Dubbed the "King of Rock and Roll", he is regarded as one of the most significant cultural figures of the 20th century. His energized interpretations of songs and sexually provocative performance style, combined with a singularly potent mix of influences across color lines during a transformative era in race relations, led him to both great success and initial controversy.
Presley was born in Tupelo, Mississippi, and relocated to Memphis, Tennessee, with his family when he was 13 years old. His music career began there in 1954, recording at Sun Records with producer Sam Phillips, who wanted to bring the sound of African-American music to a wider audience. Presley, on rhythm acoustic guitar, and accompanied by lead guitarist Scotty Moore and bassist Bill Black, was a pioneer of rockabilly, an uptempo, backbeat-driven fusion of country music and rhythm and blues. In 1955, drummer D. J. Fontana joined to complete the lineup of Presley's classic quartet and RCA Victor acquired his contract in a deal arranged by Colonel Tom Parker, who would manage him for more than two decades. Presley's first RCA Victor single, "Heartbreak Hotel", was released in January 1956 and became a number-one hit in the United States. Within a year, RCA would sell ten million Presley singles. With a series of successful network television appearances and chart-topping records, Presley became the leading figure of the newly popular sound of rock and roll; though his performative style and promotion of the then-marginalized sound of African Americans[6] led to him being widely considered a threat to the moral well-being of the White American youth.[7]
In November 1956, Presley made his film debut in Love Me Tender. Drafted into military service in 1958, Presley relaunched his recording career two years later with some of his most commercially successful work. He held few concerts, however, and guided by Parker, proceeded to devote much of the 1960s to making Hollywood films and soundtrack albums, most of them critically derided. Some of his most famous films included Jailhouse Rock (1957), Blue Hawaii (1961), and Viva Las Vegas (1964). In 1968, following a seven-year break from live performances, he returned to the stage in the acclaimed television comeback special Elvis, which led to an extended Las Vegas concert residency and a string of highly profitable tours. In 1973, Presley gave the first concert by a solo artist to be broadcast around the world, Aloha from Hawaii. Years of prescription drug abuse and unhealthy eating habits severely compromised his health, and he died suddenly in 1977 at his Graceland estate at the age of 42.
Having sold roughly 500 million records worldwide, Presley is one of the best-selling music artists of all time. He was commercially successful in many genres, including pop, country, rhythm & blues, adult contemporary, and gospel. Presley won three Grammy Awards, received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award at age 36, and has been inducted into multiple music halls of fame. He holds several records, including the most RIAA-certified gold and platinum albums, the most albums charted on the Billboard 200, the most number-one albums by a solo artist on the UK Albums Chart, and the most number-one singles by any act on the UK Singles Chart. In 2018, Presley was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Life and career
1935 1953: Early years
Childhood in Tupelo
 Presley's birthplace in Tupelo, Mississippi
Elvis Aaron Presley was born on January 8, 1935, in Tupelo, Mississippi, to Vernon Elvis and Gladys Love (n e Smith) Presley in a two-room shotgun house that his father built for the occasion.[8] Elvis's identical twin brother, Jesse Garon Presley, was delivered 35 minutes before him, stillborn.[9] Presley became close to both parents and formed an especially close bond with his mother. The family attended an Assembly of God church, where he found his initial musical inspiration.[10]
 A photo of Elvis's parents at the Historic Blue Moon Museum in Verona, Mississippi
Presley's father Vernon was of German,[11] Scottish, and English origins.[12] Vernon was a descendant of the Harrison family of Virginia, through his mother Minnie Mae Presley, n e Hood.[8] Presley's mother Gladys was Scots-Irish with some French Norman ancestry.[13] His mother and the rest of the family believed that her great-great-grandmother, Morning Dove White, was Cherokee.[14][15][16] This belief was restated by Elvis's granddaughter Riley Keough in 2017.[17] Elaine Dundy, in her biography, supports the belief.[18]
Vernon moved from one odd job to the next, showing little ambition.[19][20] The family often relied on help from neighbors and government food assistance. In 1938, they lost their home after Vernon was found guilty of altering a check written by his landowner and sometime-employer. He was jailed for eight months, while Gladys and Elvis moved in with relatives.[10]
In September 1941, Presley entered first grade at East Tupelo Consolidated, where his teachers regarded him as "average".[21] He was encouraged to enter a singing contest after impressing his schoolteacher with a rendition of Red Foley's country song "Old Shep" during morning prayers. The contest, held at the Mississippi Alabama Fair and Dairy Show on October 3, 1945, was his first public performance. The ten-year-old Presley stood on a chair to reach the microphone and sang "Old Shep". He recalled placing fifth.[22] A few months later, Presley received his first guitar for his birthday; he had hoped for something else by different accounts, either a bicycle or a rifle.[23][24] Over the following year, he received basic guitar lessons from two of his uncles and the new pastor at the family's church. Presley recalled, "I took the guitar, and I watched people, and I learned to play a little bit. But I would never sing in public. I was very shy about it."[25]
In September 1946, Presley entered a new school, Milam, for sixth grade; he was regarded as a loner. The following year, he began bringing his guitar to school on a daily basis. He played and sang during lunchtime and was often teased as a "trashy" kid who played hillbilly music. By then, the family was living in a largely black neighborhood.[26] Presley was a devotee of Mississippi Slim's show on the Tupelo radio station WELO. He was described as "crazy about music" by Slim's younger brother, who was one of Presley's classmates and often took him into the station. Slim supplemented Presley's guitar instruction by demonstrating chord techniques.[27] When his prot g  was 12 years old, Slim scheduled him for two on-air performances. Presley was overcome by stage fright the first time, but succeeded in performing the following week.[28]
Teenage life in Memphis
In November 1948, the family moved to Memphis, Tennessee. After residing for nearly a year in rooming houses, they were granted a two-bedroom apartment in the public housing complex known as the Lauderdale Courts.[29] Enrolled at L. C. Humes High School, Presley received only a C in music in eighth grade. When his music teacher told him that he had no aptitude for singing, he brought in his guitar the next day and sang a recent hit, "Keep Them Cold Icy Fingers Off Me", to prove otherwise. A classmate later recalled that the teacher "agreed that Elvis was right when he said that she didn't appreciate his kind of singing".[30] He was usually too shy to perform openly and was occasionally bullied by classmates who viewed him as a "mama's boy".[31]
In 1950, he began practicing guitar regularly under the tutelage of Lee Denson, a neighbor two and a half years his senior. They and three other boys including two future rockabilly pioneers, brothers Dorsey and Johnny Burnette formed a loose musical collective that played frequently around the Courts.[32] That September, he began working as an usher at Loew's State Theater.[33] Other jobs followed at Precision Tool, Loew's again, and MARL Metal Products.[34] Presley also helped Jewish neighbors, the Fruchters, by being their shabbos goy.
During his junior year, Presley began to stand out more among his classmates, largely because of his appearance: he grew his sideburns and styled his hair with rose oil and Vaseline. In his free time, he would head down to Beale Street, the heart of Memphis's thriving blues scene, and gaze longingly at the wild, flashy clothes in the windows of Lansky Brothers. By his senior year, he was wearing those clothes.[35] Overcoming his reticence about performing outside the Lauderdale Courts, he competed in Humes' Annual "Minstrel" show in April 1953. Singing and playing guitar, he opened with "Till I Waltz Again with You", a recent hit for Teresa Brewer. Presley recalled that the performance did much for his reputation: "I wasn't popular in school ... I failed music only thing I ever failed. And then they entered me in this talent show ... when I came onstage, I heard people kind of rumbling and whispering and so forth, 'cause nobody knew I even sang. It was amazing how popular I became in school after that."[36]
Presley, who received no formal music training and could not read music, studied and played by ear. He also visited record stores that provided jukeboxes and listening booths to customers. He knew all of Hank Snow's songs,[37] and he loved records by other country singers such as Roy Acuff, Ernest Tubb, Ted Daffan, Jimmie Rodgers, Jimmie Davis, and Bob Wills.[38] The Southern gospel singer Jake Hess, one of his favorite performers, was a significant influence on his ballad-singing style.[39][40] He was a regular audience member at the monthly All-Night Singings downtown, where many of the white gospel groups that performed reflected the influence of African-American spiritual music.[41] He adored the music of black gospel singer Sister Rosetta Tharpe.[38]
Presley listened to regional radio stations, such as WDIA-AM, that played "race records": spirituals, blues, and the modern, backbeat-heavy sound of rhythm and blues.[42] Like some of his peers, he may have attended blues venues only on nights designated for exclusively white audiences   a necessity in the segregated South.[43] Many of his future recordings were inspired by local African-American musicians such as Arthur Crudup and Rufus Thomas.[44][45] B.B. King recalled that he had known Presley before he was popular when they both used to frequent Beale Street.[46] By the time he graduated from high school in June 1953, Presley had already singled out music as his future.[47][48]
1953 1956: First recordings
Sam Phillips and Sun Records
See also: List of songs recorded by Elvis Presley on the Sun label
 Presley in a Sun Records promotional photograph, 1954
In August 1953, Presley checked into the offices of Memphis Recording Service, the company run by Sam Phillips before he started Sun Records. He aimed to pay for a few minutes of studio time to record a two-sided acetate disc: "My Happiness" and "That's When Your Heartaches Begin". He later claimed that he intended the record as a birthday gift for his mother, or that he was merely interested in what he "sounded like", although there was a much cheaper, amateur record-making service at a nearby general store. Biographer Peter Guralnick argued that he chose Sun in the hope of being discovered. Asked by receptionist Marion Keisker what kind of singer he was, Presley responded, "I sing all kinds." When she pressed him on who he sounded like, he repeatedly answered, "I don't sound like nobody." After he recorded, Sun boss Sam Phillips asked Keisker to note down the young man's name, which she did along with her own commentary: "Good ballad singer. Hold."[49]
In January 1954, Presley cut a second acetate at Sun Records "I'll Never Stand in Your Way" and "It Wouldn't Be the Same Without You" but again nothing came of it.[50] Not long after, he failed an audition for a local vocal quartet, the Songfellows. He explained to his father, "They told me I couldn't sing."[51] Songfellow Jim Hamill later claimed that he was turned down because he did not demonstrate an ear for harmony at the time.[52] In April, Presley began working for the Crown Electric company as a truck driver.[53] His friend Ronnie Smith, after playing a few local gigs with him, suggested he contact Eddie Bond, leader of Smith's professional band, which had an opening for a vocalist. Bond rejected him after a tryout, advising Presley to stick to truck driving "because you're never going to make it as a singer".[54]
Phillips, meanwhile, was always on the lookout for someone who could bring to a broader audience the sound of the black musicians on whom Sun focused. As Keisker reported, "Over and over I remember Sam saying, 'If I could find a white man who had the Negro sound and the Negro feel, I could make a billion dollars.'"[55] In June, he acquired a demo recording by Jimmy Sweeney of a ballad, "Without You", that he thought might suit the teenage singer. Presley came by the studio but was unable to do it justice. Despite this, Phillips asked Presley to sing as many numbers as he knew. He was sufficiently affected by what he heard to invite two local musicians, guitarist Winfield "Scotty" Moore and upright bass player Bill Black, to work something up with Presley for a recording session.[56]
"That's All Right"
Presley transformed not only the sound but the emotion of the song, turning what had been written as a "lament for a lost love into a satisfied declaration of independence."[57]
Problems playing this file? See media help.
The session held the evening of July 5, proved entirely unfruitful until late in the night. As they were about to abort and go home, Presley took his guitar and launched into a 1946 blues number, Arthur Crudup's "That's All Right". Moore recalled, "All of a sudden, Elvis just started singing this song, jumping around and acting the fool, and then Bill picked up his bass, and he started acting the fool, too, and I started playing with them. Sam, I think, had the door to the control booth open ... he stuck his head out and said, 'What are you doing?' And we said, 'We don't know.' 'Well, back up,' he said, 'try to find a place to start, and do it again.'" Phillips quickly began taping; this was the sound he had been looking for.[58]
Three days later, popular Memphis DJ Dewey Phillips played "That's All Right" on his Red, Hot, and Blue show.[59] Listeners began phoning in, eager to find out who the singer was. The interest was such that Phillips played the record repeatedly during the remaining two hours of his show. Interviewing Presley on-air, Phillips asked him what high school he attended to clarify his color for the many callers who had assumed that he was black.[60] During the next few days, the trio recorded a bluegrass song, Bill Monroe's "Blue Moon of Kentucky", again in a distinctive style and employing a jury-rigged echo effect that Sam Phillips dubbed "slapback". A single was pressed with "That's All Right" on the A-side and "Blue Moon of Kentucky" on the reverse.[61]
Early live performances and RCA Victor contract
The trio played publicly for the first time on July 17 at the Bon Air club Presley still sporting his child-size guitar.[62] At the end of the month, they appeared at the Overton Park Shell, with Slim Whitman headlining. Here Elvis pioneered 'Rubber Legs', his signature style dance movement that he is best known for.[63][64] A combination of his strong response to rhythm and nervousness at playing before a large crowd led Presley to shake his legs as he performed: his wide-cut pants emphasized his movements, causing young women in the audience to start screaming.[65] Moore recalled, "During the instrumental parts, he would back off from the mike and be playing and shaking, and the crowd would just go wild".[66] Black, a natural showman, whooped and rode his bass, hitting double licks that Presley would later remember as "really a wild sound, like a jungle drum or something".[66]
Soon after, Moore and Black left their old band, the Starlite Wranglers, to play with Presley regularly, and DJ/promoter Bob Neal became the trio's manager. From August through October, they played frequently at the Eagle's Nest club and returned to Sun Studio for more recording sessions,[67] and Presley quickly grew more confident on stage. According to Moore, "His movement was a natural thing, but he was also very conscious of what got a reaction. He'd do something one time and then he would expand on it real quick."[68] Presley made what would be his only appearance on Nashville's Grand Ole Opry stage on October 2; after a polite audience response, Opry manager Jim Denny told Phillips that his singer was "not bad" but did not suit the program.[69][70]
Louisiana Hayride, radio commercial, and first television performances
In November 1954, Presley performed on Louisiana Hayride the Opry's chief, and more adventurous, rival. The Shreveport-based show was broadcast to 198 radio stations in 28 states. He had another attack of nerves during the first set, which drew a muted reaction. A more composed and energetic second set inspired an enthusiastic response.[71] House drummer D. J. Fontana brought a new element, complementing Presley's movements with accented beats that he had mastered playing in strip clubs.[72] Soon after the show, the Hayride engaged Presley for a year's worth of Saturday-night appearances. Trading in his old guitar for $8 (and seeing it promptly dispatched to the garbage), he purchased a Martin instrument for $175 (equivalent to $1,800 in 2021), and his trio began playing in new locales, including Houston, Texas and Texarkana, Arkansas.[73]
Many fledgling performers, like Minnie Pearl, Johnny Horton, and Johnny Cash, sang the praises of Louisiana Hayride sponsor, Southern Maid Donuts, including Presley, who developed a lifelong love of donuts.[74] Presley made his singular product endorsement commercial for the donut company, which was never released, recording a radio jingle, "in exchange for a box of hot glazed doughnuts".[75][76] Presley made his first television appearance on the KSLA-TV television broadcast of Louisiana Hayride. Soon after, he failed an audition for Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts on the CBS television network. By early 1955, Presley's regular Hayride appearances, constant touring, and well-received record releases had made him a regional star, from Tennessee to West Texas.[77][78]
In January, Neal signed a formal management contract with Presley and brought him to the attention of Colonel Tom Parker, whom he considered the best promoter in the music business. Parker, born in the Netherlands, had immigrated illegally to the United States and claimed to be from West Virginia; he had acquired an honorary colonel's commission from the Louisiana governor and country singer Jimmie Davis. Having successfully managed the top country star Eddy Arnold, Parker was working with the new number-one country singer, Hank Snow. Parker booked Presley on Snow's February tour.[77][78] When the tour reached Odessa, Texas, a 19-year-old Roy Orbison saw Presley for the first time: "His energy was incredible, his instinct was just amazing. ... I just didn't know what to make of it. There was just no reference point in the culture to compare it."[37]
By August, Sun had released ten sides credited to "Elvis Presley, Scotty and Bill"; on the latest recordings, the trio were joined by a drummer. Some of the songs, like "That's All Right", were in what one Memphis journalist described as the "R&B idiom of negro field jazz"; others, like "Blue Moon of Kentucky", were "more in the country field", "but there was a curious blending of the two different musics in both".[79] This blend of styles made it difficult for Presley's music to find radio airplay. According to Neal, many country-music disc jockeys would not play it because he sounded too much like a black artist and none of the rhythm-and-blues stations would touch him because "he sounded too much like a hillbilly."[80] The blend came to be known as rockabilly. At the time, Presley was variously billed as "The King of Western Bop", "The Hillbilly Cat", and "The Memphis Flash".[81]
Presley renewed Neal's management contract in August 1955, simultaneously appointing Parker as his special adviser.[82] The group maintained an extensive touring schedule throughout the second half of the year.[83] Neal recalled, "It was almost frightening, the reaction that came to Elvis from the teenaged boys. So many of them, through some sort of jealousy, would practically hate him. There were occasions in some towns in Texas when we'd have to be sure to have a police guard because somebody'd always try to take a crack at him. They'd get a gang and try to waylay him or something."[84] The trio became a quartet when Hayride drummer Fontana joined as a full member. In mid-October, they played a few shows in support of Bill Haley, whose "Rock Around the Clock" track had been a number-one hit the previous year. Haley observed that Presley had a natural feel for rhythm, and advised him to sing fewer ballads.[85]
At the Country Disc Jockey Convention in early November, Presley was voted the year's most promising male artist.[86] Several record companies had by now shown interest in signing him. After three major labels made offers of up to $25,000, Parker and Phillips struck a deal with RCA Victor on November 21 to acquire Presley's Sun contract for an unprecedented $40,000.[87][b] Presley, at 20, was still a minor, so his father signed the contract.[88] Parker arranged with the owners of Hill & Range Publishing, Jean and Julian Aberbach, to create two entities, Elvis Presley Music and Gladys Music, to handle all the new material recorded by Presley. Songwriters were obliged to forgo one-third of their customary royalties in exchange for having him perform their compositions.[89][c] By December, RCA Victor had begun to heavily promote its new singer, and before month's end had reissued many of his Sun recordings.[92]
1956 1958: Commercial breakout and controversy
First national TV appearances and debut album
On January 10, 1956, Presley made his first recordings for RCA Victor in Nashville.[93] Extending Presley's by-now customary backup of Moore, Black, Fontana, and Hayride pianist Floyd Cramer who had been performing at live club dates with Presley RCA Victor enlisted guitarist Chet Atkins and three background singers, including Gordon Stoker of the popular Jordanaires quartet, to fill in the sound.[94] The session produced the moody, unusual "Heartbreak Hotel", released as a single on January 27.[93] Parker finally brought Presley to national television, booking him on CBS's Stage Show for six appearances over two months. The program, produced in New York, was hosted on alternate weeks by big band leaders and brothers Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey. After his first appearance, on January 28, Presley stayed in town to record at the RCA Victor New York studio. The sessions yielded eight songs, including a cover of Carl Perkins' rockabilly anthem "Blue Suede Shoes". In February, Presley's "I Forgot to Remember to Forget", a Sun recording initially released the previous August, reached the top of the Billboard country chart.[95] Neal's contract was terminated, and, on March 2, Parker became Presley's manager.[96]
RCA Victor released Presley's self-titled debut album on March 23. Joined by five previously unreleased Sun recordings, its seven recently recorded tracks were of a broad variety. There were two country songs and a bouncy pop tune. The others would centrally define the evolving sound of rock and roll: "Blue Suede Shoes" "an improvement over Perkins' in almost every way", according to critic Robert Hilburn and three R&B numbers that had been part of Presley's stage repertoire for some time, covers of Little Richard, Ray Charles, and The Drifters. As described by Hilburn, these "were the most revealing of all. Unlike many white artists ... who watered down the gritty edges of the original R&B versions of songs in the '50s, Presley reshaped them. He not only injected the tunes with his own vocal character but also made guitar, not piano, the lead instrument in all three cases."[97] It became the first rock and roll album to top the Billboard chart, a position it held for 10 weeks.[93] While Presley was not an innovative guitarist like Moore or contemporary African-American rockers Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry, cultural historian Gilbert B. Rodman argued that the album's cover image, "of Elvis having the time of his life on stage with a guitar in his hands played a crucial role in positioning the guitar ... as the instrument that best captured the style and spirit of this new music."[98]
Milton Berle Show and "Hound Dog"
 Presley signing autographs in Minneapolis in 1956
On April 3, Presley made the first of two appearances on NBC's Milton Berle Show. His performance, on the deck of the USS Hancock in San Diego, California, prompted cheers and screams from an audience of sailors and their dates.[99] A few days later, a flight taking Presley and his band to Nashville for a recording session left all three badly shaken when an engine died and the plane almost went down over Arkansas.[100] Twelve weeks after its original release, "Heartbreak Hotel" became Presley's first number-one pop hit. In late April, Presley began a two-week residency at the New Frontier Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip.[101] The shows were poorly received by the conservative, middle-aged hotel guests "like a jug of corn liquor at a champagne party", wrote a critic for Newsweek.[102] Amid his Vegas tenure, Presley, who had serious acting ambitions, signed a seven-year contract with Paramount Pictures.[103] He began a tour of the Midwest in mid-May, taking in 15 cities in as many days.[104] He had attended several shows by Freddie Bell and the Bellboys in Vegas and was struck by their cover of "Hound Dog", a hit in 1953 for blues singer Big Mama Thornton by songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller. It became the new closing number of his act.[105] After a show in La Crosse, Wisconsin, an urgent message on the letterhead of the local Catholic diocese's newspaper was sent to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover. It warned that "Presley is a definite danger to the security of the United States. ... [His] actions and motions were such as to rouse the sexual passions of teenaged youth. ... After the show, more than 1,000 teenagers tried to gang into Presley's room at the auditorium. ... Indications of the harm Presley did just in La Crosse were the two high school girls ... whose abdomen and thigh had Presley's autograph."[106]
The second Milton Berle Show appearance came on June 5 at NBC's Hollywood studio, amid another hectic tour. Berle persuaded Presley to leave his guitar backstage, advising, "Let 'em see you, son."[107] During the performance, Presley abruptly halted an uptempo rendition of "Hound Dog" with a wave of his arm and launched into a slow, grinding version accentuated with energetic, exaggerated body movements.[107] Presley's gyrations created a storm of controversy.[108] Television critics were outraged: Jack Gould of The New York Times wrote, "Mr. Presley has no discernible singing ability. ... His phrasing, if it can be called that, consists of the stereotyped variations that go with a beginner's aria in a bathtub. ... His one specialty is an accented movement of the body ... primarily identified with the repertoire of the blond bombshells of the burlesque runway."[109] Ben Gross of the New York Daily News opined that popular music "has reached its lowest depths in the 'grunt and groin' antics of one Elvis Presley. ... Elvis, who rotates his pelvis ... gave an exhibition that was suggestive and vulgar, tinged with the kind of animalism that should be confined to dives and bordellos".[110] Ed Sullivan, whose own variety show was the nation's most popular, declared him "unfit for family viewing".[111] To Presley's displeasure, he soon found himself being referred to as "Elvis the Pelvis", which he called "one of the most childish expressions I ever heard, comin' from an adult".[112]
Steve Allen Show and first Sullivan appearance
 Ed Sullivan and Presley during rehearsals for his second appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show, October 26, 1956
The Berle shows drew such high ratings that Presley was booked for a July 1 appearance on NBC's Steve Allen Show in New York. Allen, no fan of rock and roll, introduced a "new Elvis" in a white bow tie and black tails. Presley sang "Hound Dog" for less than a minute to a basset hound wearing a top hat and bow tie. As described by television historian Jake Austen, "Allen thought Presley was talentless and absurd ... [he] set things up so that Presley would show his contrition".[113] Allen later wrote that he found Presley's "strange, gangly, country-boy charisma, his hard-to-define cuteness, and his charming eccentricity intriguing" and simply worked him into the customary "comedy fabric" of his program.[114] Just before the final rehearsal for the show, Presley told a reporter, "I'm holding down on this show. I don't want to do anything to make people dislike me. I think TV is important so I'm going to go along, but I won't be able to give the kind of show I do in a personal appearance."[115] Presley would refer back to the Allen show as the most ridiculous performance of his career.[116] Later that night, he appeared on Hy Gardner Calling, a popular local TV show. Pressed on whether he had learned anything from the criticism to which he was being subjected, Presley responded, "No, I haven't, I don't feel like I'm doing anything wrong. ... I don't see how any type of music would have any bad influence on people when it's only music. ... I mean, how would rock 'n' roll music make anyone rebel against their parents?"[110]
The next day, Presley recorded "Hound Dog", along with "Any Way You Want Me" and "Don't Be Cruel". The Jordanaires sang harmony, as they had on The Steve Allen Show; they would work with Presley through the 1960s. A few days later, Presley made an outdoor concert appearance in Memphis, at which he announced, "You know, those people in New York are not gonna change me none. I'm gonna show you what the real Elvis is like tonight."[117] In August, a judge in Jacksonville, Florida, ordered Presley to tame his act. Throughout the following performance, he largely kept still, except for wiggling his little finger suggestively in mockery of the order.[118] The single pairing "Don't Be Cruel" with "Hound Dog" ruled the top of the charts for 11 weeks a mark that would not be surpassed for 36 years.[119] Recording sessions for Presley's second album took place in Hollywood during the first week of September. Leiber and Stoller, the writers of "Hound Dog", contributed "Love Me".[120]
Allen's show with Presley had, for the first time, beaten CBS's Ed Sullivan Show in the ratings. Sullivan, despite his June pronouncement, booked Presley for three appearances for an unprecedented $50,000.[121] The first, on September 9, 1956, was seen by approximately 60 million viewers a record 82.6 percent of the television audience.[122] Actor Charles Laughton hosted the show, filling in while Sullivan was recovering from a car accident.[111] Presley appeared in two segments that night from CBS Television City in Los Angeles. According to Elvis legend, Presley was shot only from the waist up. Watching clips of the Allen and Berle shows with his producer, Sullivan had opined that Presley "got some kind of device hanging down below the crotch of his pants so when he moves his legs back and forth you can see the outline of his cock. ... I think it's a Coke bottle. ... We just can't have this on a Sunday night. This is a family show!"[123] Sullivan publicly told TV Guide, "As for his gyrations, the whole thing can be controlled with camera shots."[121] In fact, Presley was shown head-to-toe in the first and second shows. Though the camerawork was relatively discreet during his debut, with leg-concealing closeups when he danced, the studio audience reacted in customary style: screaming.[124][125] Presley's performance of his forthcoming single, the ballad "Love Me Tender", prompted a record-shattering million advance orders.[126] More than any other single event, it was this first appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show that made Presley a national celebrity of barely precedented proportions.[111]
Accompanying Presley's rise to fame, a cultural shift was taking place that he both helped inspire and came to symbolize. The historian Marty Jezer wrote that Presley began the "biggest pop craze" since Glenn Miller and Frank Sinatra  and brought rock and roll to mainstream culture: "As Presley set the artistic pace, other artists followed. ... Presley, more than anyone else, gave the young a belief in themselves as a distinct and somehow unified generation the first in America ever to feel the power of an integrated youth culture."[127]
Crazed crowds and film debut
 Presley performing live at the Mississippi-Alabama Fairgrounds in Tupelo, September 26, 1956
"We're gonna do a sad song ..."
Presley's definition of rock and roll included a sense of humor here, during his second Sullivan appearance, he introduces one of his signature numbers.
Problems playing this file? See media help.
The audience response at Presley's live shows became increasingly fevered. Moore recalled, "He'd start out, 'You ain't nothin' but a Hound Dog,' and they'd just go to pieces. They'd always react the same way. There'd be a riot every time."[128] At the two concerts he performed in September at the Mississippi Alabama Fair and Dairy Show, 50 National Guardsmen were added to the police security to ensure that the crowd would not cause a ruckus.[129] Elvis, Presley's second RCA Victor album, was released in October and quickly rose to number one on the billboard. The album includes "Old Shep", which he sang at the talent show in 1945, and which now marked the first time he played piano on an RCA Victor session. According to Guralnick, one can hear "in the halting chords and the somewhat stumbling rhythm both the unmistakable emotion and the equally unmistakable valuing of emotion over technique."[130] Assessing the musical and cultural impact of Presley's recordings from "That's All Right" through Elvis, rock critic Dave Marsh wrote that "these records, more than any others, contain the seeds of what rock & roll was, has been and most likely what it may foreseeably become."[131]
Presley returned to the Sullivan show at its main studio in New York, hosted this time by its namesake, on October 28. After the performance, crowds in Nashville and St. Louis burned him in effigy.[111] His first motion picture, Love Me Tender, was released on November 21. Though he was not top-billed, the film's original title The Reno Brothers was changed to capitalize on his latest number-one record: "Love Me Tender" had hit the top of the charts earlier that month. To further take advantage of Presley's popularity, four musical numbers were added to what was originally a straight acting role. The film was panned by critics but did very well at the box office.[103] Presley would receive top billing on every subsequent film he made.[132]
On December 4, Presley dropped into Sun Records where Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis were recording and had an impromptu jam session along with Johnny Cash. Though Phillips no longer had the right to release any Presley material, he made sure that the session was captured on tape. The results, none officially released for 25 years, became known as the "Million Dollar Quartet" recordings.[133] The year ended with a front-page story in The Wall Street Journal reporting that Presley merchandise had brought in $22 million on top of his record sales,[134] and Billboard's declaration that he had placed more songs in the top 100 than any other artist since records were first charted.[135] In his first full year at RCA Victor, then the record industry's largest company, Presley had accounted for over 50 percent of the label's singles sales.[126]
Leiber and Stoller collaboration and draft notice
Elvis in publicity photos for the 1957 film Jailhouse Rock
Presley made his third and final Ed Sullivan Show appearance on January 6, 1957 on this occasion indeed shot only down to the waist. Some commentators have claimed that Parker orchestrated an appearance of censorship to generate publicity.[125][136] In any event, as critic Greil Marcus describes, Presley "did not tie himself down. Leaving behind the bland clothes he had worn on the first two shows, he stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha, if not a harem girl. From the make-up over his eyes, the hair falling in his face, the overwhelmingly sexual cast of his mouth, he was playing Rudolph Valentino in The Sheik, with all stops out."[111] To close, displaying his range and defying Sullivan's wishes, Presley sang a gentle black spiritual, "Peace in the Valley". At the end of the show, Sullivan declared Presley "a real decent, fine boy".[137] Two days later, the Memphis draft board announced that Presley would be classified 1-A and would probably be drafted sometime that year.[138]
Each of the three Presley singles released in the first half of 1957 went to number one: "Too Much", "All Shook Up", and "(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear". Already an international star, he was attracting fans even where his music was not officially released. Under the headline "Presley Records a Craze in Soviet", The New York Times reported that pressings of his music on discarded X-ray plates were commanding high prices in Leningrad.[139] Between film shoots and recording sessions, Presley purchased an 18-room mansion, Graceland, on March 19, 1957, for the amount of $102,500. The mansion, which was about 9 miles (14 km) south of downtown Memphis,[140] was for himself and his parents.[141][142] Before the purchase, Elvis recorded Loving You the soundtrack to his second film, which was released in July. It was Presley's third straight number-one album. The title track was written by Leiber and Stoller, who were then retained to write four of the six songs recorded at the sessions for Jailhouse Rock, Presley's next film. The songwriting team effectively produced the Jailhouse sessions and developed a close working relationship with Presley, who came to regard them as his "good-luck charm".[143] "He was fast," said Leiber. "Any demo you gave him he knew by heart in ten minutes."[144] The title track became another number-one hit, as was the Jailhouse Rock EP.[145]
 Presley and costar Judy Tyler in the trailer for Jailhouse Rock, released in October 1957
Presley undertook three brief tours during the year, continuing to generate a crazed audience response.[146] A Detroit newspaper suggested that "the trouble with going to see Elvis Presley is that you're liable to get killed".[147] Villanova students pelted him with eggs in Philadelphia,[147] and in Vancouver the crowd rioted after the end of the show, destroying the stage.[148] Frank Sinatra, who had inspired both the swooning and screaming of teenage girls in the 1940s, condemned the new musical phenomenon. In a magazine article, he decried rock and roll as "brutal, ugly, degenerate, vicious. ... It fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people. It smells phoney and false. It is sung, played and written, for the most part, by cretinous goons. ... This rancid-smelling aphrodisiac I deplore."[149] Asked for a response, Presley said, "I admire the man. He has a right to say what he wants to say. He is a great success and a fine actor, but I think he shouldn't have said it. ... This is a trend, just the same as he faced when he started years ago."[150]
Leiber and Stoller were again in the studio for the recording of Elvis' Christmas Album. Toward the end of the session, they wrote a song on the spot at Presley's request: "Santa Claus Is Back in Town", an innuendo-laden blues.[151] The holiday release stretched Presley's string of number-one albums to four and would become the best-selling Christmas album ever in the United States,[152][153] with eventual sales of over 20 million worldwide.[154] After the session, Moore and Black drawing only modest weekly salaries, sharing in none of Presley's massive financial success resigned. Though they were brought back on a per diem basis a few weeks later, it was clear that they had not been part of Presley's inner circle for some time.[155] On December 20, Presley received his draft notice. He was granted a deferment to finish the forthcoming King Creole, in which $350,000 had already been invested by Paramount and producer Hal Wallis. A couple of weeks into the new year, "Don't", another Leiber and Stoller tune, became Presley's tenth number-one seller. It had been only 21 months since "Heartbreak Hotel" had brought him to the top for the first time. Recording sessions for the King Creole soundtrack were held in Hollywood in mid-January 1958. Leiber and Stoller provided three songs and were again on hand, but it would be the last time Presley and the duo worked closely together.[156] As Stoller later recalled, Presley's manager and entourage sought to wall him off: "He was removed. ... They kept him separate."[157] A brief soundtrack session on February 11 marked another ending it was the final occasion on which Black was to perform with Presley.[158] He died in 1965.[159]
1958 1960: Military service and mother's death
Main article: Military career of Elvis Presley
 Presley being sworn into the Army on March 24, 1958, at Fort Chaffee
On March 24, 1958, Presley was drafted into the United States Army at Fort Chaffee, Arkansas. His arrival was a major media event. Hundreds of people descended on Presley as he stepped from the bus; photographers then accompanied him into the installation.[160] Presley announced that he was looking forward to his military stint, saying that he did not want to be treated any differently from anyone else: "The Army can do anything it wants with me."[161]
Between March 28 and September 17, 1958, Presley completed basic and advanced military training at Fort Hood, Texas, where he was temporarily assigned to Company A, 2d Medium Tank Battalion, 37th Armor. During the two weeks' leave between his basic and advanced training in early June, Presley recorded five songs in Nashville.[162] In early August, his mother was diagnosed with hepatitis, and her condition rapidly worsened. Presley was granted emergency leave to visit her and arrived in Memphis on August 12. Two days later, she died of heart failure at age 46. Presley was devastated and never the same;[163][164] their relationship had remained extremely close even into his adulthood, they would use baby talk with each other and Presley would address her with pet names.[4]
 Presley, wearing the 3d Armored Division Shoulder Sleeve Insignia, poses atop a tank at Ray BarracksOn October 1, 1958, Presley was assigned to the 1st Medium Tank Battalion, 32d Armor, 3d Armored Division, at Ray Barracks, Germany, where he served as an armor intelligence specialist.[1] On November 27, he was promoted to private first class and on June 1, 1959, to specialist fourth class. While on maneuvers, Presley was introduced to amphetamines by another soldier. He became "practically evangelical about their benefits", not only for energy but for "strength" and weight loss, and many of his friends in the outfit joined him in indulging.[165] The Army also introduced Presley to karate,[166] which he studied seriously, training with J rgen Seydel.[167][168] It became a lifelong interest, which he later included in his live performances.[169][170][171] Fellow soldiers have attested to Presley's wish to be seen as an able, ordinary soldier, despite his fame, and to his generosity. He donated his Army pay to charity, purchased TV sets for the base, and bought an extra set of fatigues for everyone in his outfit.[172] Presley was promoted to sergeant on February 11, 1960.[1]
While in Bad Nauheim, Germany, Presley, 24 at the time, met 14-year-old Priscilla Beaulieu. Priscilla said that due to their age difference, when they met, he told her: "Why, you re just a baby. [173] They would eventually marry after a seven-and-a-half-year courtship. In her autobiography, Priscilla said that Presley was concerned that his 24-month spell as a G.I. would ruin his career. In Special Services, he would have been able to give musical performances and remain in touch with the public, but Parker had convinced him that to gain popular respect, he should serve his country as a regular soldier.[174] Media reports echoed Presley's concerns about his career, but RCA Victor producer Steve Sholes and Freddy Bienstock of Hill and Range had carefully prepared for his two-year hiatus. Armed with a substantial amount of unreleased material, they kept up a regular stream of successful releases.[175] Between his induction and discharge, Presley had ten top 40 hits, including "Wear My Ring Around Your Neck", the bestselling "Hard Headed Woman", and "One Night" in 1958, and "(Now and Then There's) A Fool Such as I" and the number-one "A Big Hunk o' Love" in 1959.[176] RCA Victor also generated four albums compiling previously issued material during this period, most successfully Elvis' Golden Records (1958), which hit number three on the LP chart.[177]
1960 1968: Focus on films
See also: Elvis Presley on film and television
Elvis Is Back
"It's Now or Never"
Presley broke new stylistic ground and displayed his vocal range with this number-one hit. The quasi-operatic ballad ends with Presley "soaring up to an incredible top G sharp."[178]
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Presley returned to the United States on March 2, 1960, and was honorably discharged three days later.[179] The train that carried him from New Jersey to Tennessee was mobbed all the way, and Presley was called upon to appear at scheduled stops to please his fans.[180] On the night of March 20, he entered RCA Victor's Nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album along with a single, "Stuck on You", which was rushed into release and swiftly became a number-one hit.[181] Another Nashville session two weeks later yielded a pair of his bestselling singles, the ballads "It's Now or Never" and "Are You Lonesome Tonight?", along with the rest of Elvis Is Back! The album features several songs described by Greil Marcus as full of Chicago blues "menace, driven by Presley's own super-miked acoustic guitar, brilliant playing by Scotty Moore, and demonic sax work from Boots Randolph. Elvis' singing wasn't sexy, it was pornographic."[182] As a whole, the record "conjured up the vision of a performer who could be all things", according to music historian John Robertson: "a flirtatious teenage idol with a heart of gold; a tempestuous, dangerous lover; a gutbucket blues singer; a sophisticated nightclub entertainer; [a] raucous rocker".[183] Released only days after recording was complete, it reached number two on the album chart.[184][185]
 Presley with Juliet Prowse in G.I. Blues
Presley returned to television on May 12 as a guest on The Frank Sinatra Timex Special ironic for both stars, given Sinatra's earlier excoriation of rock and roll. Also known as Welcome Home Elvis, the show had been taped in late March, the only time all year Presley performed in front of an audience. Parker secured an unheard-of $125,000 fee for eight minutes of singing. The broadcast drew an enormous viewership.[186]
G.I. Blues, the soundtrack to Presley's first film since his return, was a number-one album in October. His first LP of sacred material, His Hand in Mine, followed two months later. It reached number 13 on the US pop chart and number 3 in the UK, remarkable figures for a gospel album. In February 1961, Presley performed two shows for a benefit event in Memphis, on behalf of 24 local charities. During a luncheon preceding the event, RCA Victor presented him with a plaque certifying worldwide sales of over 75 million records.[187] A 12-hour Nashville session in mid-March yielded nearly all of Presley's next studio album, Something for Everybody.[188] As described by John Robertson, it exemplifies the Nashville sound, the restrained, cosmopolitan style that would define country music in the 1960s. Presaging much of what was to come from Presley himself over the next half-decade, the album is largely "a pleasant, unthreatening pastiche of the music that had once been Elvis' birthright".[189] It would be his sixth number-one LP. Another benefit concert, raising money for a Pearl Harbor memorial, was staged on March 25, in Hawaii. It was to be Presley's last public performance for seven years.[190]
Lost in Hollywood
Parker had by now pushed Presley into a heavy filmmaking schedule, focused on formulaic, modestly budgeted musical comedies. Presley, at first, insisted on pursuing higher roles, but when two films in a more dramatic vein Flaming Star (1960) and Wild in the Country (1961) were less commercially successful, he reverted to the formula. Among the 27 films he made during the 1960s, there were a few further exceptions.[191] His films were almost universally panned; critic Andrew Caine dismissed them as a "pantheon of bad taste".[192] Nonetheless, they were virtually all profitable. Hal Wallis, who produced nine of them, declared, "A Presley picture is the only sure thing in Hollywood."[193]
Of Presley's films in the 1960s, 15 were accompanied by soundtrack albums and another 5 by soundtrack EPs. The films' rapid production and release schedules he frequently starred in three a year affected his music. According to Jerry Leiber, the soundtrack formula was already evident before Presley left for the Army: "three ballads, one medium-tempo [number], one up-tempo, and one break blues boogie".[194] As the decade wore on, the quality of the soundtrack songs grew "progressively worse".[195] Julie Parrish, who appeared in Paradise, Hawaiian Style (1966), says that he disliked many of the songs chosen for his films.[196] The Jordanaires' Gordon Stoker describes how Presley would retreat from the studio microphone: "The material was so bad that he felt like he couldn't sing it."[197] Most of the film albums featured a song or two from respected writers such as the team of Doc Pomus and Mort Shuman. But by and large, according to biographer Jerry Hopkins, the numbers seemed to be "written on order by men who never really understood Elvis or rock and roll".[198] Regardless of the songs' quality, it has been argued that Presley generally sang them well, with commitment.[199] Critic Dave Marsh heard the opposite: "Presley isn't trying, probably the wisest course in the face of material like 'No Room to Rumba in a Sports Car' and 'Rock-A-Hula Baby'."[131]
In the first half of the decade, three of Presley's soundtrack albums were ranked number one on the pop charts, and a few of his most popular songs came from his films, such as "Can't Help Falling in Love" (1961) and "Return to Sender" (1962). ("Viva Las Vegas", the title track to the 1964 film, was a minor hit as a B-side, and became truly popular only later.) But, as with artistic merit, the commercial returns steadily diminished. During a five-year span 1964 through 1968 Presley had only one top-ten hit: "Crying in the Chapel" (1965), a gospel number recorded back in 1960. As for non-film albums, between the June 1962 release of Pot Luck and the November 1968 release of the soundtrack to the television special that signaled his comeback, only one LP of new material by Presley was issued: the gospel album How Great Thou Art (1967). It won him his first Grammy Award, for Best Sacred Performance. As Marsh described, Presley was "arguably the greatest white gospel singer of his time [and] really the last rock & roll artist to make gospel as vital a component of his musical personality as his secular songs".[200]
Shortly before Christmas 1966, more than seven years since they first met, Presley proposed to Priscilla Beaulieu. They were married on May 1, 1967, in a brief ceremony in their suite at the Aladdin Hotel in Las Vegas.[201] The flow of formulaic films and assembly-line soundtracks rolled on. It was not until October 1967, when the Clambake soundtrack LP registered record low sales for a new Presley album, that RCA executives recognized a problem. "By then, of course, the damage had been done", as historians Connie Kirchberg and Marc Hendrickx put it. "Elvis was viewed as a joke by serious music lovers and a has-been to all but his most loyal fans."[202]
1968 1973: Comeback
Elvis: the '68 Comeback Special
Main article: Singer Presents...Elvis
 The '68 Comeback Special produced "one of the most famous images" of Presley.[203] Taken on June 29, 1968, it was adapted for the cover of Rolling Stone in July 1969.[203][204]
Presley's only child, Lisa Marie, was born on February 1, 1968, during a period when he had grown deeply unhappy with his career.[205] Of the eight Presley singles released between January 1967 and May 1968, only two charted in the top 40, and none higher than number 28.[206] His forthcoming soundtrack album, Speedway, would rank at number 82 on the Billboard chart. Parker had already shifted his plans to television, where Presley had not appeared since the Sinatra Timex show in 1960. He maneuvered a deal with NBC that committed the network to both finance a theatrical feature and broadcast a Christmas special.[207]
Recorded in late June in Burbank, California, the special, simply called Elvis, aired on December 3, 1968. Later known as the '68 Comeback Special, the show featured lavishly staged studio productions as well as songs performed with a band in front of a small audience Presley's first live performances since 1961. The live segments saw Presley dressed in tight black leather, singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited style reminiscent of his early rock and roll days. Director and co-producer Steve Binder had worked hard to produce a show that was far from the hour of Christmas songs Parker had originally planned.[208] The show, NBC's highest-rated that season, captured 42 percent of the total viewing audience.[209] Jon Landau of Eye magazine remarked, "There is something magical about watching a man who has lost himself find his way back home. He sang with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock 'n' roll singers. He moved his body with a lack of pretension and effort that must have made Jim Morrison green with envy."[210] Dave Marsh calls the performance one of "emotional grandeur and historical resonance".[211]
By January 1969, the single "If I Can Dream", written for the special, reached number 12. The soundtrack album rose into the top ten. According to friend Jerry Schilling, the special reminded Presley of what "he had not been able to do for years, being able to choose the people; being able to choose what songs and not being told what had to be on the soundtrack. ... He was out of prison, man."[209] Binder said of Presley's reaction, "I played Elvis the 60-minute show, and he told me in the screening room, 'Steve, it's the greatest thing I've ever done in my life. I give you my word I will never sing a song I don't believe in.'"[209]
From Elvis in Memphis and the International
"Power of My Love"
Beginning with his American Sound recordings, soul music became a central element in Presley's fusion of styles. Here, he revels in lyrics full of sexual innuendo.[212]
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Buoyed by the experience of the Comeback Special, Presley engaged in a prolific series of recording sessions at American Sound Studio, which led to the acclaimed From Elvis in Memphis. Released in June 1969, it was his first secular, non-soundtrack album from a dedicated period in the studio in eight years. As described by Dave Marsh, it is "a masterpiece in which Presley immediately catches up with pop music trends that had seemed to pass him by during the movie years. He sings country songs, soul songs and rockers with real conviction, a stunning achievement."[213] The album featured the hit single "In the Ghetto", issued in April, which reached number three on the pop chart Presley's first non-gospel top ten hit since "Bossa Nova Baby" in 1963. Further hit singles were culled from the American Sound sessions: "Suspicious Minds", "Don't Cry Daddy", and "Kentucky Rain".[214]
Presley was keen to resume regular live performing. Following the success of the Comeback Special, offers came in from around the world. The London Palladium offered Parker US$28,000 (equivalent to $207,000 in 2021) for a one-week engagement. He responded, "That's fine for me, now how much can you get for Elvis?"[215] In May, the brand-new International Hotel in Las Vegas, boasting the largest showroom in the city, announced that it had booked Presley. He was scheduled to perform 57 shows over four weeks, beginning July 31. Moore, Fontana, and the Jordanaires declined to participate, afraid of losing the lucrative session work they had in Nashville. Presley assembled new, top-notch accompaniment, led by guitarist James Burton and including two gospel groups, The Imperials and Sweet Inspirations.[216] Costume designer Bill Belew, responsible for the intense leather styling of the Comeback Special, created a new stage look for Presley, inspired by Presley's passion for karate.[217] Nonetheless, he was nervous: his only previous Las Vegas engagement, in 1956, had been dismal. Parker, who intended to make Presley's return the show business event of the year, oversaw a major promotional push. For his part, International Hotel owner Kirk Kerkorian arranged to send his own plane to New York to fly in rock journalists for the debut performance.[218]
Presley took to the stage without introduction. The audience of 2,200, including many celebrities, gave him a standing ovation before he sang a note and another after his performance. A third followed his encore, "Can't Help Falling in Love" (a song that would be his closing number for much of his remaining life).[219] At a press conference after the show, when a journalist referred to him as "The King", Presley gestured toward Fats Domino, who was taking in the scene. "No," Presley said, "that's the real king of rock and roll."[220] The next day, Parker's negotiations with the hotel resulted in a five-year contract for Presley to play each February and August, at an annual salary of $1 million.[221] Newsweek commented, "There are several unbelievable things about Elvis, but the most incredible is his staying power in a world where meteoric careers fade like shooting stars."[222] Rolling Stone called Presley "supernatural, his own resurrection."[223] In November, Presley's final non-concert film, Change of Habit, opened. The double album From Memphis to Vegas/From Vegas to Memphis came out the same month; the first LP consisted of live performances from the International, the second of more cuts from the American Sound sessions. "Suspicious Minds" reached the top of the charts Presley's first US pop number-one in over seven years, and his last.[224]
Cassandra Peterson, later television's Elvira, met Presley during this period in Las Vegas, where she was working as a showgirl. She recalled of their encounter, "He was so anti-drug when I met him. I mentioned to him that I smoked marijuana, and he was just appalled. He said, 'Don't ever do that again.'"[225] Presley was not only deeply opposed to recreational drugs, he also rarely drank. Several of his family members had been alcoholics, a fate he intended to avoid.[226]
Back on tour and meeting Nixon
Presley returned to the International early in 1970 for the first of the year's two-month-long engagements, performing two shows a night. Recordings from these shows were issued on the album On Stage.[227] In late February, Presley performed six attendance-record breaking shows at the Houston Astrodome.[228] In April, the single "The Wonder of You" was issued a number one hit in the UK, it topped the US adult contemporary chart, as well. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer filmed rehearsal and concert footage at the International during August for the documentary Elvis: That's the Way It Is. Presley was performing in a jumpsuit, which would become a trademark of his live act. During this engagement, he was threatened with murder unless US$50,000 (equivalent to $349,000 in 2021) was paid. Presley had been the target of many threats since the 1950s, often without his knowledge.[229] The FBI took the threat seriously and security was stepped up for the next two shows. Presley went onstage with a Derringer in his right boot and a .45 pistol in his waistband, but the concerts succeeded without any incidents.[230][231]
The album, That's the Way It Is, produced to accompany the documentary and featuring both studio and live recordings, marked a stylistic shift. As music historian John Robertson noted, "The authority of Presley's singing helped disguise the fact that the album stepped decisively away from the American-roots inspiration of the Memphis sessions towards a more middle-of-the-road sound. With country put on the back burner, and soul and R&B left in Memphis, what was left was very classy, very clean white pop perfect for the Las Vegas crowd, but a definite retrograde step for Elvis."[232] After the end of his International engagement on September 7, Presley embarked on a week-long concert tour, largely of the South, his first since 1958. Another week-long tour, of the West Coast, followed in November.[233]
 Presley meets US President Richard Nixon in the White House Oval Office, December 21, 1970
On December 21, 1970, Presley engineered a meeting with President Richard Nixon at the White House, where he expressed his patriotism and explained how he believed he could reach out to the hippies to help combat the drug culture he and the president abhorred. He asked Nixon for a Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs badge, to add to similar items he had begun collecting and to signify official sanction of his patriotic efforts. Nixon, who apparently found the encounter awkward, expressed a belief that Presley could send a positive message to young people and that it was, therefore, important that he "retain his credibility".[234] Presley told Nixon that the Beatles, whose songs he regularly performed in concert during the era,[235] exemplified what he saw as a trend of anti-Americanism.[236] Presley and his friends previously had a four-hour get-together with the Beatles at his home in Bel Air, California, in August 1965. On hearing reports of the meeting, Paul McCartney later said that he "felt a bit betrayed. ... The great joke was that we were taking [illegal] drugs, and look what happened to him", a reference to Presley's early death, linked to prescription drug abuse.[237]
The US Junior Chamber of Commerce named Presley one of its annual Ten Most Outstanding Young Men of the Nation on January 16, 1971.[238] Not long after, the City of Memphis named the stretch of Highway 51 South on which Graceland is located "Elvis Presley Boulevard". The same year, Presley became the first rock and roll singer to be awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award (then known as the Bing Crosby Award) by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the Grammy Award organization.[239][240] Three new, non-film Presley studio albums were released in 1971, as many as had come out over the previous eight years. Best received by critics was Elvis Country, a concept record that focused on genre standards.[241] The biggest seller was Elvis Sings The Wonderful World of Christmas, "the truest statement of all", according to Greil Marcus. "In the midst of ten painfully genteel Christmas songs, every one sung with appalling sincerity and humility, one could find Elvis tom-catting his way through six blazing minutes of "Merry Christmas Baby", a raunchy old Charles Brown blues. ... If [Presley's] sin was his lifelessness, it was his sinfulness that brought him to life".[242]
Marriage breakdown and Aloha from Hawaii
See also: Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite Presley (center) with friends Bill Porter (left) and Paul Anka (right) backstage at the Las Vegas Hilton on August 5, 1972MGM again filmed Presley in April 1972, this time for Elvis on Tour, which went on to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Documentary Film for that year's Golden Globe Awards. His gospel album He Touched Me, released that month, would earn him his second Grammy Award for Best Inspirational Performance, for that year's Grammy Awards. A 14-date tour commenced with an unprecedented four consecutive sold-out shows at New York's Madison Square Garden.[243] The evening concert on July 10 was recorded and issued in an LP form a week later. Elvis: As Recorded at Madison Square Garden became one of Presley's biggest-selling albums. After the tour, the single "Burning Love" was released Presley's last top ten hit on the US pop chart. "The most exciting single Elvis has made since 'All Shook Up'", wrote rock critic Robert Christgau. "Who else could make 'It's coming closer, the flames are now licking my body' sound like an assignation with James Brown's backup band?"[244]
 Presley came up with his outfit's eagle motif, as "something that would say 'America' to the world"[245]
Presley and his wife, meanwhile, had become increasingly distant, barely cohabiting. In 1971, an affair he had with Joyce Bova resulted unbeknownst to him in her pregnancy and an abortion.[246] He often raised the possibility of her moving into Graceland, saying that he was likely to leave Priscilla.[247] The Presleys separated on February 23, 1972, after Priscilla disclosed her relationship with Mike Stone, a karate instructor Presley had recommended to her. Priscilla related that when she told him, Presley "grabbed ... and forcefully made love to" her, declaring, "This is how a real man makes love to his woman".[248] She later stated in an interview that she regretted her choice of words in describing the incident, and said it had been an overstatement.[249] Five months later, Presley's new girlfriend, Linda Thompson, a songwriter and one-time Memphis beauty queen, moved in with him.[250] Presley and his wife filed for divorce on August 18.[251] According to Joe Moscheo of the Imperials, the failure of Presley's marriage "was a blow from which he never recovered".[252] At a rare press conference that June, a reporter had asked Presley whether he was satisfied with his image. Presley replied, "Well, the image is one thing and the human being another ... it's very hard to live up to an image."[253]
In January 1973, Presley performed two benefit concerts for the Kui Lee Cancer Fund in connection with a groundbreaking TV special, Aloha from Hawaii, which would be the first concert by a solo artist to be aired globally. The first show served as a practice run and backup should technical problems affect the live broadcast two days later. On January 14, Aloha from Hawaii aired live via satellite to prime-time audiences in Japan, South Korea, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand, as well as to US servicemen based across Southeast Asia. In Japan, where it capped a nationwide Elvis Presley Week, it smashed viewing records. The next night, it was simulcast to 28 European countries, and in April an extended version finally aired in the US, where it won a 57 percent share of the TV audience.[254] Over time, Parker's claim that it was seen by one billion or more people[255] would be broadly accepted,[256][257][258] but that figure appeared to have been sheer invention.[259] Presley's stage costume became the most recognized example of the elaborate concert garb with which his latter-day persona became closely associated. As described by Bobbie Ann Mason, "At the end of the show, when he spreads out his American Eagle cape, with the full stretched wings of the eagle studded on the back, he becomes a god figure."[260] The accompanying double album, released in February, went to number one and eventually sold over 5 million copies in the United States.[261] It was Presley's last US number-one pop album during his lifetime.[262]
At a midnight show the same month, four men rushed onto the stage in an apparent attack. Security men came to Presley's defense, and he ejected one invader from the stage himself. Following the show, he became obsessed with the idea that the men had been sent by Mike Stone to kill him. Though they were shown to have been only overexuberant fans, he raged, "There's too much pain in me ... Stone [must] die." His outbursts continued with such intensity that a physician was unable to calm him, despite administering large doses of medication. After another two full days of raging, Red West, his friend and bodyguard, felt compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when Presley decided, "Aw hell, let's just leave it for now. Maybe it's a bit heavy."[263]
1973 1977: Health deterioration and death
Medical crises and last studio sessions
Presley's divorce was finalized on October 9, 1973.[264] By then, his health was in serious decline. Twice during the year, he overdosed on barbiturates, spending three days in a coma in his hotel suite after the first incident. Towards the end of 1973, he was hospitalized, semi-comatose from the effects of a pethidine addiction. According to his primary care physician, Dr. George C. Nichopoulos, Presley "felt that by getting drugs from a doctor, he wasn't the common everyday junkie getting something off the street".[265] Since his comeback, he had staged more live shows with each passing year, and 1973 saw 168 concerts, his busiest schedule ever.[266] Despite his failing health, in 1974, he undertook another intensive touring schedule.[267]
Presley's condition declined precipitously in September. Keyboardist Tony Brown remembered Presley's arrival at a University of Maryland concert: "He fell out of the limousine, to his knees. People jumped to help, and he pushed them away like, 'Don't help me.' He walked on stage and held onto the mic for the first thirty minutes like it was a post. Everybody's looking at each other like, 'Is the tour gonna happen'?"[268] Guitarist John Wilkinson recalled, "He was all gut. He was slurring. He was so fucked up. ... It was obvious he was drugged. It was obvious there was something terribly wrong with his body. It was so bad the words to the songs were barely intelligible. ... I remember crying. He could barely get through the introductions."[269]
Wilkinson recounted that a few nights later in Detroit, "I watched him in his dressing room, just draped over a chair, unable to move. So often I thought, 'Boss, why don't you just cancel this tour and take a year off ...?' I mentioned something once in a guarded moment. He patted me on the back and said, 'It'll be all right. Don't you worry about it.'"[269] Presley continued to play to sellout crowds. Cultural critic Marjorie Garber wrote that he was now widely seen as a garish pop crooner: "In effect, he had become Liberace. Even his fans were now middle-aged matrons and blue-haired grandmothers."[270]
On July 13, 1976, Presley's father who had become deeply involved in his financial affairs fired "Memphis Mafia" bodyguards Red West (Presley's friend since the 1950s), Sonny West, and David Hebler, citing the need to "cut back on expenses".[271][272][273] Presley was in Palm Springs at the time, and some suggested that he was too cowardly to face the three himself. Another associate of Presley's, John O'Grady, argued that the bodyguards were dropped because their rough treatment of fans had prompted too many lawsuits.[274] However, Presley's stepbrother, David Stanley, claimed that the bodyguards were fired because they were becoming more outspoken about Presley's drug dependency.[275]
RCA, which had always enjoyed a steady stream of product from Presley, began to grow anxious as his interest in the recording studio waned. After a session in December 1973 that produced 18 songs, enough for almost two albums, Presley made no official studio recordings in 1974.[276] Parker delivered RCA another concert record, Elvis Recorded Live on Stage in Memphis.[277] Recorded on March 20, it included a version of "How Great Thou Art" that won Presley his third and final Grammy Award for Best Inspirational Performance at that year's Grammy Awards.[278][279] All three of his competitive Grammy wins  out of 14 total nominations  were for gospel recordings.[279] Presley returned to the recording studio in Hollywood in March 1975, but Parker's attempts to arrange another session toward the end of the year were unsuccessful.[280] In 1976, RCA sent a mobile recording unit to Graceland that made possible two full-scale recording sessions at Presley's home.[281] However, the recording process had become a struggle for him.[282]
"Hurt"
An R&B hit for Roy Hamilton in 1955 and a pop hit for blue-eyed soul singer Timi Yuro in 1961, Presley's deep soul version was picked up by country radio in 1976.[283]
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Despite concerns from RCA and Parker, between July 1973 and October 1976, Presley recorded virtually the entire contents of six albums. Though he was no longer a major presence on the pop charts, five of those albums entered the top five of the country albums chart, and three went to number one: Promised Land (1975), From Elvis Presley Boulevard, Memphis, Tennessee (1976), and Moody Blue (1977).[284]
Though Presley's singles in this era were not major pop hits, he remained a significant force in the country and adult contemporary markets. Eight studio singles from this period released during his lifetime were top ten hits on one or both charts, four in 1974 alone. "My Boy" was a number-one adult contemporary hit in 1975, and "Moody Blue" topped the country singles chart and reached the second spot on the adult contemporary chart in 1976.[285] Perhaps his most critically acclaimed recording of the era came that year, with what Greil Marcus described as his "apocalyptic attack" on the soul classic "Hurt".[286] Dave Marsh wrote of Presley's performance: "If he felt the way he sounded, the wonder isn't that he had only a year left to live but that he managed to survive that long."[287]
Presley and Linda Thompson split in November 1976, and Presley took up with a new girlfriend, Ginger Alden.[288] He proposed to Alden and gave her an engagement ring two months later, though several of his friends later said he had no serious intention of marrying again.[289]
Final months
The journalist Tony Scherman wrote that, by early 1977, "Presley had become a grotesque caricature of his sleek, energetic former self. Grossly overweight, his mind dulled by the pharmacopia he daily ingested, he was barely able to pull himself through his abbreviated concerts."[290] According to Andy Greene of Rolling Stone, Presley's final performances were mostly "sad, sloppy affairs where a bloated, drugged Presley struggled to remember his lyrics and get through the night without collapsing ... Most everything from the final three years of his life is sad and hard to watch."[291] In Alexandria, Louisiana, he was on stage for less than an hour and "was impossible to understand".[292] On March 31, Presley canceled a performance in Baton Rouge, unable to get out of his hotel bed; four shows had to be canceled and rescheduled.[293]
Despite the accelerating deterioration of his health, Presley fulfilled most of his touring commitments. According to Guralnick, fans "were becoming increasingly voluble about their disappointment, but it all seemed to go right past Presley, whose world was now confined almost entirely to his room and his spiritualism books".[294] Presley's cousin, Billy Smith, recalled how he would sit in his room and chat for hours, sometimes recounting favorite Monty Python sketches and his past escapades, but more often gripped by paranoid obsessions that reminded Smith of the billionaire recluse Howard Hughes.[295]
"Way Down", Presley's last single issued during his lifetime, was released on June 6, 1977. That month, CBS taped two concerts for a TV special, Elvis in Concert, to be broadcast in October. In the first, shot in Omaha on June 19, Presley's voice, Guralnick writes, "is almost unrecognizable, a small, childlike instrument in which he talks more than sings most of the songs, casts about uncertainly for the melody in others, and is virtually unable to articulate or project".[296] Two days later, in Rapid City, South Dakota, "he looked healthier, seemed to have lost a little weight, and sounded better, too", though, by the conclusion of the performance, his face was "framed in a helmet of blue-black hair from which sweat sheets down over pale, swollen cheeks".[296] Presley's final concert was held in Indianapolis at Market Square Arena, on June 26, 1977.[297]
 Presley's gravestone at Graceland
The book Elvis: What Happened?, co-written by the three bodyguards fired the previous year, was published on August 1.[298] It was the first expos  to detail Presley's years of drug misuse. He was devastated by the book, and tried unsuccessfully to halt its publication by offering money to the publishers.[299] By this point he suffered from glaucoma, hypertension, liver damage, and an enlarged colon, each magnified and possibly caused by drug abuse.[265]
Death
See also: Elvis sightings
On the evening of August 16, 1977, Presley was scheduled to fly out of Memphis to begin another tour. That afternoon, Ginger Alden discovered him in an unresponsive state on the bathroom floor of his Graceland mansion.[300] "For some reason   perhaps involving a reaction to the codeine and attempts to move his bowels   he experienced pain and fright while sitting on the toilet. Alarmed, he stood up ... and fell face down in the fetal position." Drooling on the rug and "unable to breathe, he died."[301] Attempts to revive him failed, and he was pronounced dead at Baptist Memorial Hospital at 3:30 p.m.[302] He was 42 years old.[303]
President Jimmy Carter issued a statement that credited Presley with having "permanently changed the face of American popular culture".[304] Thousands of people gathered outside Graceland to view the open casket. One of Presley's cousins, Billy Mann, accepted US$18,000 (equivalent to $80,000 in 2021) to secretly photograph the body; the picture appeared on the cover of the National Enquirer's biggest-selling issue ever.[305] Alden struck a $105,000 (equivalent to $470,000 in 2021) deal with the Enquirer for her story, but settled for less when she broke her exclusivity agreement.[306] Presley left her nothing in his will.[307]
Presley's funeral was held at Graceland on Thursday, August 18. Outside the gates, a car plowed into a group of fans, killing two young women and critically injuring a third.[308] About 80,000 people lined the processional route to Forest Hill Cemetery, where Presley was buried next to his mother.[309] Within a few weeks, "Way Down" topped the country and UK singles chart.[285][310] Following an attempt to steal Presley's body in late August, the remains of both Presley and his mother were exhumed and reburied in Graceland's Meditation Garden on October 2. Presley is buried alongside his parents, daughter, grandson and his paternal grandmother in the Meditation Garden at Graceland.[306]
Cause of death
While an autopsy, undertaken the same day Presley died, was still in progress, Memphis medical examiner Jerry Francisco announced that the immediate cause of death was cardiac arrest. Asked if drugs were involved, he declared that "drugs played no role in Presley's death".[311] In fact, "drug use was heavily implicated" in Presley's death, writes Guralnick. The pathologists conducting the autopsy thought it possible, for instance, that he had suffered "anaphylactic shock brought on by the codeine pills he had gotten from his dentist, to which he was known to have had a mild allergy". A pair of lab reports filed two months later strongly suggested that polypharmacy was the primary cause of death; one reported "fourteen drugs in Elvis' system, ten in significant quantity".[312] In 1979, forensic pathologist Cyril Wecht conducted a review of the reports and concluded that a combination of central nervous system depressants had resulted in Presley's accidental death.[311] Forensic historian and pathologist Michael Baden viewed the situation as complicated: "Elvis had had an enlarged heart for a long time. That, together with his drug habit, caused his death. But he was difficult to diagnose; it was a judgment call."[313]
The competence and ethics of two of the centrally involved medical professionals were seriously questioned. Francisco had offered a cause of death before the autopsy was complete; claimed the underlying ailment was cardiac arrhythmia, a condition that can be determined only in someone who is still alive; and denied drugs played any part in Presley's death before the toxicology results were known.[311] Allegations of a cover-up were widespread.[313] While a 1981 trial of Presley's main physician, George C. Nichopoulos, exonerated him of criminal liability for his death, the facts were startling: "In the first eight months of 1977 alone, he had [prescribed] more than 10,000 doses of sedatives, amphetamines, and narcotics: all in Elvis' name." His license was suspended for three months. It was permanently revoked in the 1990s after the Tennessee Medical Board brought new charges of over-prescription.[265]
In 1994, the Presley autopsy report was reopened. Joseph Davis, who had conducted thousands of autopsies as Miami-Dade County coroner,[314] declared at its completion, "There is nothing in any of the data that supports a death from drugs. In fact, everything points to a sudden, violent heart attack."[265] More recent research has revealed that Francisco did not speak for the entire pathology team. Other staff "could say nothing with confidence until they got the results back from the laboratories, if then. That would be a matter of weeks." One of the examiners, E. Eric Muirhead, "could not believe his ears. Francisco had not only presumed to speak for the hospital's team of pathologists, he had announced a conclusion that they had not reached. ... Early on, a meticulous dissection of the body ... confirmed [that] Elvis was chronically ill with diabetes, glaucoma, and constipation. As they proceeded, the doctors saw evidence that his body had been wracked over a span of years by a large and constant stream of drugs. They had also studied his hospital records, which included two admissions for drug detoxification and methadone treatments."[315] Writer Frank Coffey thought Presley's death was due to "a phenomenon called the Valsalva maneuver (essentially straining on the toilet leading to heart stoppage plausible because Elvis suffered constipation, a common reaction to drug use)".[316] In similar terms, Dan Warlick, who was present at the autopsy, "believes Presley's chronic constipation the result of years of prescription drug abuse and high-fat, high-cholesterol gorging brought on what's known as Valsalva's maneuver. Put simply, the strain of attempting to defecate compressed the singer's abdominal aorta, shutting down his heart."[317]
However, in 2013, Forest Tennant, who had testified as a defense witness in Nichopoulos' trial, described his own analysis of Presley's available medical records. He concluded that Presley's "drug abuse had led to falls, head trauma, and overdoses that damaged his brain", and that his death was due in part to a toxic reaction to codeine exacerbated by an undetected liver enzyme defect which can cause sudden cardiac arrhythmia.[318] DNA analysis in 2014 of a hair sample, purported to be Presley's, found evidence of genetic variants that can lead to glaucoma, migraines, and obesity; a crucial variant associated with the heart muscle disease hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was also identified.[319]
Later developments
Between 1977 and 1981, six of Presley's posthumously released singles were top-ten country hits.[285] Presley's home, Graceland, was opened to the public in 1982. Attracting over half a million visitors annually, it became the second-most-visited home in the United States, after the White House.[320] It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 2006.[321]
Presley has been inducted into five music halls of fame: the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (1986), the Country Music Hall of Fame (1998), the Gospel Music Hall of Fame (2001), the Rockabilly Hall of Fame (2007), and the Memphis Music Hall of Fame (2012). In 1984, he received the W. C. Handy Award from the Blues Foundation and the Academy of Country Music's first Golden Hat Award. In 1987, he received the American Music Awards' Award of Merit.[322]
A Junkie XL remix of Presley's "A Little Less Conversation" (credited as "Elvis Vs JXL") was used in a Nike advertising campaign during the 2002 FIFA World Cup. It topped the charts in over 20 countries and was included in a compilation of Presley's number-one hits, ELV1S, which was also an international success. The album returned Presley to the Billboard summit[clarification needed] for the first time in almost three decades.[323]
In 2003, a remix of "Rubberneckin'", a 1969 recording of Presley's, topped the US sales chart, as did a 50th-anniversary re-release of "That's All Right" the following year.[324] The latter was an outright hit in Britain, debuting at number three on the pop chart; it also made the top ten in Canada.[325] In 2005, another three reissued singles, "Jailhouse Rock", "One Night"/"I Got Stung", and "It's Now or Never", went to number one in the United Kingdom. They were part of a campaign that saw the re-release of all 18 of Presley's previous chart-topping UK singles. The first, "All Shook Up", came with a collectors' box that made it ineligible to chart again; each of the other 17 reissues hit the British top five.[326]
In 2005, Forbes named Presley the top-earning deceased celebrity for the fifth straight year, with a gross income of $45 million.[327] He was placed second in 2006,[328] returned to the top spot the next two years,[329][330] and ranked fourth in 2009.[331] The following year, he was ranked second, with his highest annual income ever $60 million spurred by the celebration of his 75th birthday and the launch of Cirque du Soleil's Viva Elvis show in Las Vegas.[332] In November 2010, Viva Elvis: The Album was released, setting his voice to newly recorded instrumental tracks.[333][334] As of mid-2011, there were an estimated 15,000 licensed Presley products,[335] and he was again the second-highest-earning deceased celebrity.[336] Six years later, he ranked fourth with earnings of $35 million, up $8 million from 2016 due in part to the opening of a new entertainment complex, Elvis Presley's Memphis, and hotel, The Guest House at Graceland.[337]
In 2018, RCA/Legacy released Elvis Presley   Where No One Stands Alone, a new album focused on Elvis's love of gospel music. Produced by Joel Weinshanker, Lisa Marie Presley and Andy Childs, the album introduced newly recorded instrumentation along with vocals from singers who had performed in the past with Elvis. It also included a reimagined duet with Lisa Marie, on the album's title track.[338]
In 2022, Baz Luhrmann's film Elvis, a biopic about Presley's life, was released in theaters. Presley is portrayed by Austin Butler and Colonel Tom Parker by Tom Hanks. As of August 2022, the film had grossed $261.8 million worldwide on a $85 million budget, becoming the second-highest-grossing music biopic of all-time behind Bohemian Rhapsody (2018), and the fifth-highest-grossing Australian-produced film. For his portrayal of Elvis, Butler won the Golden Globe and was nominated for the Oscar for Best Actor.[339] In January 2023, on what would have been Presley s 88th birthday, his 1962 Lockheed 1329 JetStar sold at an auction for $260,000. The plane sold at the Mecum Kissimmee Collector Car auction in Florida.[340]
Artistry
Influences
Presley's earliest musical influence came from gospel. His mother recalled that from the age of two, at the Assembly of God church in Tupelo attended by the family, "he would slide down off my lap, run into the aisle and scramble up to the platform. There he would stand looking at the choir and trying to sing with them."[341] In Memphis, Presley frequently attended all-night gospel singings at the Ellis Auditorium, where groups such as the Statesmen Quartet led the music in a style that, Guralnick suggests, sowed the seeds of Presley's future stage act:
The Statesmen were an electric combination ... featuring some of the most thrillingly emotive singing and daringly unconventional showmanship in the entertainment world ... dressed in suits that might have come out of the window of Lansky's. ... Bass singer Jim Wetherington, known universally as the Big Chief, maintained a steady bottom, ceaselessly jiggling first his left leg, then his right, with the material of the pants leg ballooning out and shimmering. "He went about as far as you could go in gospel music," said Jake Hess. "The women would jump up, just like they do for the pop shows." Preachers frequently objected to the lewd movements ... but audiences reacted with screams and swoons.[342]
As a teenager, Presley's musical interests were wide-ranging, and he was deeply informed about both white and African-American musical idioms. Though he never had any formal training, he had a remarkable memory, and his musical knowledge was already considerable by the time he made his first professional recordings aged 19 in 1954. When Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller met him two years later, they were astonished at his encyclopedic understanding of the blues,[343] and, as Stoller put it, "He certainly knew a lot more than we did about country music and gospel music."[157] At a press conference the following year, he proudly declared, "I know practically every religious song that's ever been written."[148]
Musicianship
Presley played guitar, bass, and piano; he received his first guitar when he was 11 years old. He could not read or write music and had no formal lessons, and played everything by ear.[344] Presley often played an instrument on his recordings and produced his own music. Presley played rhythm acoustic guitar on most of his Sun recordings and his 1950s RCA albums. He played electric bass guitar on "(You're So Square) Baby I Don't Care" after his bassist Bill Black had trouble with the instrument.[345] Presley played the bass line including the intro. Presley played piano on songs such as "Old Shep" and "First in Line" from his 1956 album Elvis.[346] He is credited with playing piano on later albums such as From Elvis in Memphis and "Moody Blue", and on "Unchained Melody", which was one of the last songs that he recorded.[347] Presley played lead guitar on one of his successful singles called "Are You Lonesome Tonight".[348] In the 68 Comeback Special, Elvis took over on lead electric guitar, the first time he had ever been seen with the instrument in public, playing it on songs such as "Baby What You Want Me to Do" and "One Night".[349] Presley played the back of his guitar on some of his hits such as "All Shook Up", "Don't Be Cruel", and "(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear", providing percussion by slapping the instrument to create a beat.[350] The album Elvis is Back! features Presley playing a lot of acoustic guitar on songs such as "I Will Be Home Again" and "Like a Baby".[351]
Musical styles and genres
 Presley with his longtime vocal backup group, the Jordanaires, March 1957
Presley was a central figure in the development of rockabilly, according to music historians. "Rockabilly crystallized into a recognizable style in 1954 with Elvis Presley's first release, on the Sun label," writes Craig Morrison.[352] Paul Friedlander described rockabilly as "essentially ... an Elvis Presley construction", with the defining elements as "the raw, emotive, and slurred vocal style and emphasis on rhythmic feeling [of] the blues with the string band and strummed rhythm guitar [of] country".[353] In "That's All Right", the Presley trio's first record, Scotty Moore's guitar solo, "a combination of Merle Travis style country finger-picking, double-stop slides from acoustic boogie, and blues-based bent-note, single-string work, is a microcosm of this fusion".[353] While Katherine Charlton calls Presley "rockabilly's originator",[354] Presley's guitarist Carl Perkins said that "[Sam] Phillips, Elvis, and I didn't create rockabilly";[355] according to Michael Campbell, the first major rockabilly song was recorded by Bill Haley.[356] In Moore's view, "It had been there for quite a while, really. Carl Perkins was doing basically the same sort of thing up around Jackson, and I know for a fact Jerry Lee Lewis had been playing that kind of music ever since he was ten years old."[357]
At RCA Victor, Presley's rock and roll sound grew distinct from rockabilly with group chorus vocals, more heavily amplified electric guitars[358] and a tougher, more intense manner.[359] While he was known for taking songs from various sources and giving them a rockabilly/rock and roll treatment, he also recorded songs in other genres from early in his career, from the pop standard "Blue Moon" at Sun Records to the country ballad "How's the World Treating You?" on his second RCA Victor LP to the blues of "Santa Claus Is Back in Town". In 1957, his first gospel record was released, the four-song EP Peace in the Valley. Certified as a million-seller, it became the top-selling gospel EP in recording history.[360] Presley would record gospel periodically for the rest of his life.
"Run On"
From How Great Thou Art (1967), a traditional song popular in the black gospel tradition. The arrangement evokes "the percussive style of the 1930s Golden Gate Quartet."[361][362]
Problems playing this file? See media help.
After his return from military service in 1960, Presley continued to perform rock and roll, but the characteristic style was substantially toned down. His first post-Army single, the number-one hit "Stuck on You", is typical of this shift. RCA Victor publicity referred to its "mild rock beat"; discographer Ernst Jorgensen calls it "upbeat pop".[363] The number five "She's Not You" (1962) "integrates the Jordanaires so completely, it's practically doo-wop".[364] The modern blues/R&B sound captured with success on Elvis Is Back! was essentially abandoned for six years until such 1966 67 recordings as "Down in the Alley" and "Hi-Heel Sneakers".[365] Presley's output during most of the 1960s emphasized pop music, often in the form of ballads such as "Are You Lonesome Tonight?", a number-one in 1960. "It's Now or Never", which also topped the chart that year, was a classically influenced variation of pop based on the Neapolitan song "'O sole mio" and concluding with a "full-voiced operatic cadence".[366] These were both dramatic numbers, but most of what Presley recorded for his many film soundtracks was in a much lighter vein.[367]
While Presley performed several of his classic ballads for the '68 Comeback Special, the sound of the show was dominated by aggressive rock and roll. He recorded few new straight rock and roll songs thereafter; as he explained, they had become "hard to find".[368] A significant exception was "Burning Love", his last major hit on the pop charts. Like his work of the 1950s, Presley's subsequent recordings reworked pop and country songs, but in markedly different permutations. His stylistic range now began to embrace a more contemporary rock sound as well as soul and funk. Much of Elvis in Memphis, as well as "Suspicious Minds", cut at the same sessions, reflected this new rock and soul fusion. In the mid-1970s, many of his singles found a home on country radio, the field where he first became a star.[369]
Vocal style and range
 Publicity photo for the CBS program Stage Show, January 16, 1956
The developmental arc of Presley's singing voice, as described by critic Dave Marsh, goes from "high and thrilled in the early days, [to] lower and perplexed in the final months."[370] Marsh credits Presley with the introduction of the "vocal stutter" on 1955's "Baby Let's Play House".[371] When on "Don't Be Cruel", Presley "slides into a 'mmmmm' that marks the transition between the first two verses," he shows "how masterful his relaxed style really is."[372] Marsh describes the vocal performance on "Can't Help Falling in Love" as one of "gentle insistence and delicacy of phrasing", with the line "'Shall I stay' pronounced as if the words are fragile as crystal".[373]
Jorgensen calls the 1966 recording of "How Great Thou Art" "an extraordinary fulfillment of his vocal ambitions", as Presley "crafted for himself an ad-hoc arrangement in which he took every part of the four-part vocal, from [the] bass intro to the soaring heights of the song's operatic climax", becoming "a kind of one-man quartet".[374] Guralnick finds "Stand by Me" from the same gospel sessions "a beautifully articulated, almost nakedly yearning performance," but, by contrast, feels that Presley reaches beyond his powers on "Where No One Stands Alone", resorting "to a kind of inelegant bellowing to push out a sound" that Jake Hess of the Statesmen Quartet had in his command. Hess himself thought that while others might have voices the equal of Presley's, "he had that certain something that everyone searches for all during their lifetime."[375] Guralnick attempts to pinpoint that something: "The warmth of his voice, his controlled use of both vibrato technique and natural falsetto range, the subtlety and deeply felt conviction of his singing were all qualities recognizably belonging to his talent but just as recognizably not to be achieved without sustained dedication and effort."[376]
Marsh praises his 1968 reading of "U.S. Male", "bearing down on the hard guy lyrics, not sending them up or overplaying them but tossing them around with that astonishingly tough yet gentle assurance that he brought to his Sun records."[377] The performance on "In the Ghetto" is, according to Jorgensen, "devoid of any of his characteristic vocal tricks or mannerisms", instead relying on the exceptional "clarity and sensitivity of his voice".[378] Guralnick describes the song's delivery as of "almost translucent eloquence ... so quietly confident in its simplicity".[379] On "Suspicious Minds", Guralnick hears essentially the same "remarkable mixture of tenderness and poise", but supplemented with "an expressive quality somewhere between stoicism (at suspected infidelity) and anguish (over impending loss)".[380]
Music critic Henry Pleasants observes that "Presley has been described variously as a baritone and a tenor. An extraordinary compass ... and a very wide range of vocal color have something to do with this divergence of opinion."[381] He identifies Presley as a high baritone, calculating his range as two octaves and a third, "from the baritone low G to the tenor high B, with an upward extension in falsetto to at least a D-flat. Presley's best octave is in the middle, D-flat to D-flat, granting an extra full step up or down."[381] In Pleasants' view, his voice was "variable and unpredictable" at the bottom, "often brilliant" at the top, with the capacity for "full-voiced high Gs and As that an opera baritone might envy".[381] Scholar Lindsay Waters, who figures Presley's range as two-and-a-quarter octaves, emphasizes that "his voice had an emotional range from tender whispers to sighs down to shouts, grunts, grumbles, and sheer gruffness that could move the listener from calmness and surrender, to fear. His voice can not be measured in octaves, but in decibels; even that misses the problem of how to measure delicate whispers that are hardly audible at all."[382] Presley was always "able to duplicate the open, hoarse, ecstatic, screaming, shouting, wailing, reckless sound of the black rhythm-and-blues and gospel singers", writes Pleasants, and also demonstrated a remarkable ability to assimilate many other vocal styles.[381]
Public image
Relationship with the African-American community
When Dewey Phillips first aired "That's All Right" on Memphis' WHBQ, many listeners who contacted the station by phone and telegram to ask for it again assumed that its singer was black.[60] From the beginning of his national fame, Presley expressed respect for African-American performers and their music, and disregard for the norms of segregation and racial prejudice then prevalent in the South. Interviewed in 1956, he recalled how in his childhood he would listen to blues musician Arthur Crudup the originator of "That's All Right" "bang his box the way I do now, and I said if I ever got to the place where I could feel all old Arthur felt, I'd be a music man like nobody ever saw."[44] The Memphis World, an African-American newspaper, reported that Presley, "the rock 'n' roll phenomenon", "cracked Memphis' segregation laws" by attending the local amusement park on what was designated as its "colored night".[44] Such statements and actions led Presley to be generally hailed in the black community during the early days of his stardom.[44] In contrast, many white adults "did not like him, and condemned him as depraved. Anti-negro prejudice doubtless figured in adult antagonism. Regardless of whether parents were aware of the Negro sexual origins of the phrase 'rock 'n' roll', Presley impressed them as the visual and aural embodiment of sex."[6]
Despite the largely positive view of Presley held by African Americans, a rumor spread in mid-1957 that he had at some point announced, "The only thing Negroes can do for me is buy my records and shine my shoes." A journalist with the national African-American weekly Jet, Louie Robinson, pursued the story. On the set of Jailhouse Rock, Presley granted Robinson an interview, though he was no longer dealing with the mainstream press. He denied making such a statement: "I never said anything like that, and people who know me know that I wouldn't have said it. ... A lot of people seem to think I started this business. But rock 'n' roll was here a long time before I came along. Nobody can sing that kind of music like colored people. Let's face it: I can't sing like Fats Domino can. I know that."[383] Robinson found no evidence that the remark had ever been made, and on the contrary elicited testimony from many individuals indicating that Presley was anything but racist.[44][384] Blues singer Ivory Joe Hunter, who had heard the rumor before he visited Graceland one evening, reported of Presley, "He showed me every courtesy, and I think he's one of the greatest."[385] Though the rumored remark was discredited, it was still being used against Presley decades later.[386]
The identification of Presley with racism either personally or symbolically was expressed in the lyrics of the 1989 rap hit "Fight the Power", by Public Enemy: "Elvis was a hero to most / But he never meant shit to me / Straight-up racist that sucker was / Simple and plain / Motherfuck him and John Wayne".[387] In an interview with Newsday timed with the 25th anniversary of Presley's death, the Public Enemy member Chuck D, the author of the line, acknowledged that Presley was held in esteem by black musicians and that Presley had admired black musicians. Chuck D said that he had intended to attack white culture which hailed Presley as a "king" without acknowledging the black artists before him.[388][389]
The persistence of such attitudes was fueled by resentment over the fact that Presley, whose musical and visual performance idiom owed much to African-American sources, achieved the cultural acknowledgement and commercial success largely denied his black peers.[384] Into the 21st century, the notion that Presley had "stolen" black music still found adherents.[example  needed][386][387] Notable among African-American entertainers expressly rejecting this view was Jackie Wilson, who argued, "A lot of people have accused Elvis of stealing the black man's music, when in fact, almost every black solo entertainer copied his stage mannerisms from Elvis."[390] Moreover, Presley also acknowledged his debt to African-American musicians throughout his career. Addressing his '68 Comeback Special audience, he said, "Rock 'n' roll music is basically gospel or rhythm and blues, or it sprang from that. People have been adding to it, adding instruments to it, experimenting with it, but it all boils down to [that]."[391] Nine years earlier, he had said, "Rock 'n' roll has been around for many years. It used to be called rhythm and blues."[392]
Sex symbol
 Poster for the film Girls! Girls! Girls! (1962), visualizing Presley's sex symbol image
Presley's physical attractiveness and sexual appeal were widely acknowledged. "He was once beautiful, astonishingly beautiful", according to critic Mark Feeney.[393] Television director Steve Binder, no fan of Presley's music before he oversaw the 1968 Comeback Special, reported, "I'm straight as an arrow and I got to tell you, you stop, whether you're male or female, to look at him. He was that good looking. And if you never knew he was a superstar, it wouldn't make any difference; if he'd walked in the room, you'd know somebody special was in your presence."[394] His performance style, as much as his physical beauty, was responsible for Presley's eroticized image. Writing in 1970, critic George Melly described him as "the master of the sexual simile, treating his guitar as both phallus and girl".[395] In his Presley obituary, Lester Bangs credited him as "the man who brought overt blatant vulgar sexual frenzy to the popular arts in America".[396] Ed Sullivan's declaration that he perceived a soda bottle in Presley's trousers was echoed by rumors involving a similarly positioned toilet roll tube or lead bar.[397]
While Presley was marketed as an icon of heterosexuality, some cultural critics have argued that his image was ambiguous. In 1959, Sight and Sound's Peter John Dyer described his onscreen persona as "aggressively bisexual in appeal".[398] Brett Farmer places the "orgasmic gyrations" of the title dance sequence in Jailhouse Rock within a lineage of cinematic musical numbers that offer a "spectacular eroticization, if not homoeroticization, of the male image".[399] In the analysis of Yvonne Tasker, "Elvis was an ambivalent figure who articulated a peculiar feminised, objectifying version of white working-class masculinity as aggressive sexual display."[400]
Reinforcing Presley's image as a sex symbol were the reports of his dalliances with various Hollywood stars and starlets, from Natalie Wood in the 1950s to Connie Stevens and Ann-Margret in the 1960s to Candice Bergen and Cybill Shepherd in the 1970s. June Juanico of Memphis, one of Presley's early girlfriends, later blamed Parker for encouraging him to choose his dating partners with publicity in mind.[225] Presley never grew comfortable with the Hollywood scene, and most of these relationships were insubstantial.[401]
Equestrian
Elvis kept several horses at Graceland, and horses remain important to the Graceland estate. A local former teacher, Alene Alexander, has taken care of the horses at Graceland for 38 years. She and Priscilla Presley have a love for horses and have formed a special friendship. It was because of Priscilla that Elvis brought horses to Graceland. "He got me my first horse as a Christmas present  Domino," said Priscilla Presley. Alexander now serves as Graceland's Ambassador. She is one of three of the original staff members still working at the estate.[402]
The horse named Palomino Rising Sun was Elvis' favorite horse, and there are many photographs of him riding him.[403]
Associates
Colonel Parker and the Aberbachs
Further information: Colonel Tom Parker
 Presley and Colonel Tom Parker, 1969
Once he became Presley's manager, Colonel Tom Parker insisted on exceptionally tight control over his client's career. Early on, he and his Hill and Range allies, the brothers Jean and Julian Aberbach, perceived the close relationship that developed between Presley and songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller as a serious threat to that control.[404] Parker effectively ended the relationship, deliberately or not, with the new contract he sent Leiber in early 1958. Leiber thought there was a mistake the sheet of paper was blank except for Parker's signature and a line on which to enter his. "There's no mistake, boy, just sign it and return it", Parker directed. "Don't worry, we'll fill it in later." Leiber declined, and Presley's fruitful collaboration with the writing team was over.[405] Other respected songwriters lost interest in or simply avoided writing for Presley because of the requirement that they surrender a third of their usual royalties.[406]
By 1967, Parker's contracts gave him 50 percent of most of Presley's earnings from recordings, films, and merchandise.[407] Beginning in February 1972, he took a third of the profit from live appearances;[408] a January 1976 agreement entitled him to half of that as well.[409] Priscilla Presley noted that "Elvis detested the business side of his career. He would sign a contract without even reading it."[410] Presley's friend Marty Lacker regarded Parker as a "hustler and a con artist. He was only interested in 'now money' get the buck and get gone."[411] Priscilla Presley said after Parker's death, however, that Elvis was happy to pay 50% to Parker to manage him.[412]
Lacker was instrumental in convincing Presley to record with Memphis producer Chips Moman and his handpicked musicians at American Sound Studio in early 1969. The American Sound sessions represented a significant departure from the control customarily exerted by Hill and Range. Moman still had to deal with the publisher's staff on-site, whose song suggestions he regarded as unacceptable. He was on the verge of quitting until Presley ordered the Hill and Range personnel out of the studio.[413] Although RCA executive Joan Deary was later full of praise for the producer's song choices and the quality of the recordings,[414] Moman, to his fury, received neither credit on the records nor royalties for his work.[415]
Throughout his entire career, Presley performed in only three venues outside the United States all of them in Canada, during brief tours there in 1957.[416] In 1968, he remarked, "Before too long I'm going to make some personal appearance tours. I'll probably start out here in this country and after that, play some concerts abroad, probably starting in Europe. I want to see some places I've never seen before."[210] Rumors that he would play overseas for the first time were fueled in 1974 by a million-dollar bid for an Australian tour. Parker was uncharacteristically reluctant, prompting those close to Presley to speculate about the manager's past and the reasons for his evident unwillingness to apply for a passport.[417] After Presley's death, it was revealed that Parker was born Andreas Cornelis van Kuijk in the Netherlands; having immigrated illegally to the US, he supposedly had reason to fear that if he left the country, he would not be allowed back in again.[418] Parker ultimately rejected any notions Presley had of working abroad, claiming that foreign security was poor and the venues unsuitable for a star of his magnitude.[419]
Parker arguably exercised tightest control over Presley's film career. Hal Wallis said, "I'd rather try and close a deal with the devil" than with Parker. Fellow film producer Sam Katzman described him as "the biggest con artist in the world".[420] In 1957, Robert Mitchum asked Presley to costar with him in Thunder Road, which Mitchum was producing and writing.[421] According to George Klein, one of his oldest friends, Presley was also offered starring roles in West Side Story and Midnight Cowboy.[422] In 1974, Barbra Streisand approached Presley to star with her in the remake of A Star is Born.[423] In each case, any ambitions Presley may have had to play such parts were thwarted by his manager's negotiating demands or flat refusals. In Lacker's description, "The only thing that kept Elvis going after the early years was a new challenge. But Parker kept running everything into the ground."[411] The prevailing attitude may have been summed up best by the response Leiber and Stoller received when they brought a serious film project for Presley to Parker and the Hill and Range owners for their consideration. In Leiber's telling, Jean Aberbach warned them to never again "try to interfere with the business or artistic workings of the process known as Elvis Presley".[194]
Memphis Mafia
Main article: Memphis Mafia
In the early 1960s, the circle of friends with whom Presley constantly surrounded himself until his death came to be known as the "Memphis Mafia".[424] "Surrounded by the[ir] parasitic presence", as journalist John Harris puts it, "it was no wonder that as he slid into addiction and torpor, no-one raised the alarm: to them, Elvis was the bank, and it had to remain open."[425] Tony Brown, who played piano for Presley regularly in the last two years of Presley's life, observed his rapidly declining health and the urgent need to address it: "But we all knew it was hopeless because Elvis was surrounded by that little circle of people ... all those so-called friends".[426] In the Memphis Mafia's defense, Marty Lacker has said, "[Presley] was his own man. ... If we hadn't been around, he would have been dead a lot earlier."[427]
Larry Geller became Presley's hairdresser in 1964. Unlike others in the Memphis Mafia, he was interested in spiritual questions and recalls how, from their first conversation, Presley revealed his secret thoughts and anxieties: "I mean there has to be a purpose ... there's got to be a reason ... why I was chosen to be Elvis Presley. ... I swear to God, no one knows how lonely I get. And how empty I really feel."[428] Thereafter, Geller supplied him with books on religion and mysticism, which Presley read voraciously.[429] Presley would be preoccupied by such matters for much of his life, taking trunkloads of books on tour.[265]
Legacy
Further information: Cultural impact of Elvis Presley, Cultural depictions of Elvis Presley, Elvis has left the building, and List of songs about or referencing Elvis Presley
I know he invented rock and roll, in a manner of speaking, but ... that's not why he's worshiped as a god today. He's worshiped as a god today because in addition to inventing rock and roll he was the greatest ballad singer this side of Frank Sinatra because the spiritual translucence and reined-in gut sexuality of his slow weeper and torchy pop blues still activate the hormones and slavish devotion of millions of female human beings worldwide.
 Robert Christgau  December 24, 1985[430]
Presley's rise to national attention in 1956 transformed the field of popular music and had a huge effect on the broader scope of popular culture.[431] As the catalyst for the cultural revolution that was rock and roll, he was central not only to defining it as a musical genre but in making it a touchstone of youth culture and rebellious attitude.[432] With its racially mixed origins repeatedly affirmed by Presley rock and roll's occupation of a central position in mainstream American culture facilitated a new acceptance and appreciation of black culture.[433]
In this regard, Little Richard said of Presley, "He was an integrator. Elvis was a blessing. They wouldn't let black music through. He opened the door for black music."[434] Al Green agreed: "He broke the ice for all of us."[435]
President Jimmy Carter remarked on Presley's legacy in 1977: "His music and his personality, fusing the styles of white country and black rhythm and blues, permanently changed the face of American popular culture. His following was immense, and he was a symbol to people the world over of the vitality, rebelliousness, and good humor of his country."[304] Presley also heralded the vastly expanded reach of celebrity in the era of mass communication: at the age of 21, within a year of his first appearance on American network television, he was regarded as one of the most famous people in the world.[436]
 A group of Elvis impersonators in 2005
Presley's name, image, and voice are recognized around the world.[437] He has inspired a legion of impersonators.[438] In polls and surveys, he is recognized as one of the most important popular music artists and influential Americans.[d] American composer and conductor Leonard Bernstein said, "Elvis Presley is the greatest cultural force in the twentieth century. He introduced the beat to everything and he changed everything music, language, clothes. It's a whole new social revolution the sixties came from it."[446] John Lennon said that "Nothing really affected me until Elvis."[447] Bob Dylan described the sensation of first hearing Presley as "like busting out of jail".[435]
 Presley's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6777 Hollywood Blvd
For much of his adult life, Presley, with his rise from poverty to riches and fame, had seemed to epitomize the American Dream.[448][449] In his final years, and following the revelations about his circumstances after his death, he became a symbol of excess and gluttony.[450][451] Increasing attention was paid to his appetite for the rich, heavy Southern cooking of his upbringing, foods such as chicken-fried steak and biscuits and gravy.[452][453] In particular, his love of fried peanut butter, banana, and (sometimes) bacon sandwiches,[454][452] now known as "Elvis sandwiches",[455] came to symbolize this characteristic.[456] According to the media scholar Robert Thompson, the sandwich also signified Presley's enduring all-American appeal: "He wasn't only the king, he was one of us."[457]
Since 1977, there have been numerous alleged sightings of Presley. A long-standing conspiracy theory among some fans is that he faked his death.[458][459] Adherents cite alleged discrepancies in the death certificate, reports of a wax dummy in his original coffin, and accounts of Presley planning a diversion so he could retire in peace.[460] An unusually large number of fans have domestic shrines devoted to Presley and journey to sites with which he is connected, however faintly.[461] Every August 16, the anniversary of his death, thousands of people gather outside Graceland and celebrate his memory with a candlelight ritual.[462] "With Elvis, it is not just his music that has survived death", writes Ted Harrison. "He himself has been raised, like a medieval saint, to a figure of cultic status. It is as if he has been canonized by acclamation."[461]
On the 25th anniversary of Presley's death, The New York Times asserted, "All the talentless impersonators and appalling black velvet paintings on display can make him seem little more than a perverse and distant memory. But before Elvis was camp, he was its opposite: a genuine cultural force. ... Elvis' breakthroughs are underappreciated because in this rock-and-roll age, his hard-rocking music and sultry style have triumphed so completely."[463] Not only Presley's achievements but his failings as well, are seen by some cultural observers as adding to the power of his legacy, as in this description by Greil Marcus:
Elvis Presley is a supreme figure in American life, one whose presence, no matter how banal or predictable, brooks no real comparisons. ... The cultural range of his music has expanded to the point where it includes not only the hits of the day, but also patriotic recitals, pure country gospel, and really dirty blues. ... Elvis has emerged as a great artist, a great rocker, a great purveyor of schlock, a great heart throb, a great bore, a great symbol of potency, a great ham, a great nice person, and, yes, a great American.[464]
Achievements
Having sold about 500 million records worldwide, Presley is one of the best-selling music artists of all time.[465]
Presley holds the records for most songs charting in Billboard's top 40 (115)[466][467][468] and top 100 (152), according to chart statistician Joel Whitburn,[468][469] 139 according to Presley historian Adam Victor.[467][468] Presley's rankings for top ten and number-one hits vary depending on how the double-sided "Hound Dog/Don't Be Cruel" and "Don't/I Beg of You" singles, which precede the inception of Billboard's unified Hot 100 chart, are analyzed.[e] According to Whitburn's analysis, Presley holds the record with 38, tying with Madonna;[466] per Billboard's current assessment, he ranks second with 36.[470] Whitburn and Billboard concur that the Beatles hold the record for most number-one hits with 20, and that Mariah Carey is second with 19.[471] Whitburn has Presley with 18:[466] Billboard has him third with 17.[472] According to Billboard,  Presley has 79 cumulative weeks at number one: alone at 80, according to Whitburn and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame,[473][474] with only Mariah Carey having more with 91 weeks.[475] He holds the records for most number-one singles on the UK chart with 21 and singles reaching the top ten with 76.[476][477]
As an album artist, Presley is credited by Billboard with the record for the most albums charting in the Billboard 200: 129, far ahead of second-place Frank Sinatra's 82. He also holds the record for most time spent at number one on the Billboard 200: 67 weeks.[478] In 2015 and 2016, two albums setting Presley's vocals against music by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, If I Can Dream and The Wonder of You, both reached number one in the United Kingdom. This gave him a new record for number-one UK albums by a solo artist with 13, and extended his record for longest span between number-one albums by anybody Presley had first topped the British chart in 1956 with his self-titled debut.[479]
As of 2023[update], the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) credits Presley with 146.5 million certified album sales in the US, third all time behind the Beatles and Garth Brooks.[480] He holds the records for most gold albums (101, nearly twice as many as second-place Barbra Streisand's 51),[481] and most platinum albums (57).[482] His 25 multi-platinum albums is second behind the Beatles' 26.[483] His total of 197 album certification awards (including one diamond award), far outpaces the Beatles' second-best 122.[484] He has the 9th-most gold singles (54, tied with Justin Bieber),[485] and the 16th-most platinum singles (27).[486]
In 2012, the spider Paradonea presleyi was named in his honor.[487] In 2018, President Donald Trump awarded Presley the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumously.[488]
Bands
See also: The Blue Moon Boys, TCB Band, Nashville A-Team, and The Jordanaires
Presley worked with many bands and studio musicians over the course of his career. The following is a list and timeline of the most prominent musicians that worked with Presley during his lifetime.
Scotty Moore   lead guitar, rhythm guitar, backing vocals (1954 59, 1960 69; died 2016)
Bill Black   double bass, bass guitar, backing vocals (1954 58; died 1965)
DJ Fontana   drums, backing vocals (1955 59, 1960 69; died 2018)
Gordon Stoker   backing vocals, piano, organ, accordion, percussion (1956 59, 1960 68, 1969 71; died 2013)
Neal Matthews, Jr.   backing vocals, guitar, bass guitar, double bass (1956 59, 1960 68, 1969 71; died 2000)
Hoyt Hawkins   backing vocals, piano, organ, percussion (1956 59, 1960 68, 1969 71; died 1980)
Hugh Jarrett   backing vocals (1956 58; died 2008)
Ray Walker   backing vocals (1958 59, 1960 68, 1969 71)
Bob Moore   double bass, bass guitar (1958 59, 1960 68; died 2021)
Dudley Brooks   piano, celeste (1957 59, 1960 63; died 1989)
Tiny Timbrell   rhythm and lead guitars, mandolin (1958 59, 1963 68; died 1992)
Hank Garland   lead guitar, bass guitar (1960 61; died 2004)
Floyd Cramer   piano, organ (1960, 1963 68; died 1997)
Boots Randolph   saxophone, vibraphone, percussion (1960 62, 1964 68; died 2007)
Buddy Harman   drums, percussion (1960 63, 1964 68; died 2008)
Clifford Scott   saxophone (1962 64; died 1993)
Tony Terran   trumpet (1963-1968, 1971 1972; died 2017)
Hal Blaine   drums, percussion (1963; died 2019)
Charlie Hodge   rhythm guitar, harmony and backing vocals (1967 77; died 2006)
Reggie Young   lead guitar (1969; died 2019)
Mike Leech   bass guitar (1969)
Tommy Cogbill   bass guitar (1969)
Bobby Wood   piano (1969)
Bobby Emmons   electric piano, organ (1969)
Gene Chrisman   drums (1969)
James Burton   lead guitar (1969 77)
John Wilkinson   rhythm guitar (1969 77; died 2013)
Jerry Scheff   bass guitar (1969 73, 1975 77)
Ronnie Tutt   drums (1969, 1970 77; died 2021)
Larry Muhoberac   piano, electric piano (1969; died 2016)
Bob Lanning   drums (1970)
Glen D. Hardin   piano (1970 76)
Emory Gordy, Jr   bass guitar (1973)
Duke Bardwell   bass guitar (1973 75)
David Briggs   electric piano, clavinet, piano, organ (1975 77)
Tony Brown   piano, organ (1976 77)
Bobby Ogdin   electric piano, clavinet, piano (1977)
Discography
Main articles: Elvis Presley albums discography, Elvis Presley singles discography, and List of songs recorded by Elvis Presley
A vast number of recordings have been issued under Presley's name. The total number of his original master recordings has been variously calculated as 665[467] and 711.[393] His career began and he was most successful during an era when singles were the primary commercial medium for pop music. In the case of his albums, the distinction between "official" studio records and other forms is often blurred. For most of the 1960s, his recording career focused on soundtrack albums. In the 1970s, his most heavily promoted and bestselling LP releases tended to be concert albums.
Studio albums
Elvis Presley (1956)
Elvis (1956)
Elvis' Christmas Album (1957)
Elvis Is Back! (1960)
His Hand in Mine (1960)
Something for Everybody (1961)
Pot Luck (1962)
Elvis for Everyone! (1965)
How Great Thou Art (1967)
From Elvis in Memphis (1969)
From Memphis to Vegas / From Vegas to Memphis (1969)
That's the Way It Is (1970)
Elvis Country (I'm 10,000 Years Old) (1971)
Love Letters from Elvis (1971)
Elvis sings The Wonderful World of Christmas (1971)
Elvis Now (1972)
He Touched Me (1972)
Elvis (1973) (The "Fool" Album)
Raised on Rock / For Ol' Times Sake (1973)
Good Times (1974)
Promised Land (1975)
Today (1975)
From Elvis Presley Boulevard, Memphis, Tennessee (1976)
Moody Blue (1977)
Soundtrack albums (original material)
Loving You (1957)
King Creole (1958)
G.I. Blues (1960)
Blue Hawaii (1961)
Girls! Girls! Girls! (1962)
It Happened at the World's Fair (1963)
Fun in Acapulco (1963)
Kissin' Cousins (1964)
Roustabout (1964)
Girl Happy (1965)
Harum Scarum (1965)
Frankie and Johnny (1966)
Paradise, Hawaiian Style (1966)
Spinout (1966)
Double Trouble (1967)
Clambake (1967)
Speedway (1968)
Filmography
Main article: Elvis Presley on film and television
Films starred
Love Me Tender (1956)
Loving You (1957)
Jailhouse Rock (1957)
King Creole (1958)
G.I. Blues (1960)
Flaming Star (1960)
Wild in the Country (1961)
Blue Hawaii (1961)
Follow That Dream (1962)
Kid Galahad (1962)
Girls! Girls! Girls! (1962)
It Happened at the World's Fair (1963)
Fun in Acapulco (1963)
Kissin' Cousins (1964)
Viva Las Vegas (1964)
Roustabout (1964)
Girl Happy (1965)
Tickle Me (1965)
Harum Scarum (1965)
Frankie and Johnny (1966)
Paradise, Hawaiian Style (1966)
Spinout (1966)
Easy Come, Easy Go (1967)
Double Trouble (1967)
Clambake (1967)
Stay Away, Joe (1968)
Speedway (1968)
Live a Little, Love a Little (1968)
Charro! (1969)
The Trouble with Girls (1969)
Change of Habit (1969)
Elvis: That's the Way It Is (1970)
Elvis on Tour (1972)
TV concert specials
Elvis (1968)
Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite (1973)
Elvis in Concert (1977)
See also
Elvis Presley Enterprises
Honorific nicknames in popular music
List of artists by number of UK Albums Chart number ones
List of artists by number of UK Singles Chart number ones
List of bestselling music artists
Personal relationships of Elvis Presley
Explanatory notes
^ a b Although some pronounce his surname / pr zli/ PREZ-lee, Presley himself pronounced it / pr sli/ PRESS-lee, as did his family and those who worked with him.[2]The correct spelling of his middle name has long been a matter of debate. The physician who delivered him wrote "Elvis Aaron Presley" in his ledger.[3] The state-issued birth certificate reads "Elvis Aron Presley". The name was chosen after the Presleys' friend and fellow congregation member Aaron Kennedy, though a single-A spelling was probably intended by Presley's parents to parallel the middle name of Presley's stillborn brother, Jesse Garon.[4] It reads Aron on most official documents produced during his lifetime, including his high school diploma, RCA Victor record contract, and marriage license, and this was generally taken to be the proper spelling.[5] In 1966, Presley expressed the desire to his father that the more traditional biblical rendering, Aaron, be used henceforth, "especially on legal documents".[3] Five years later, the Jaycees citation honoring him as one of the country's Outstanding Young Men used Aaron. Late in his life, he sought to officially change the spelling to Aaron and discovered that state records already listed it that way. Knowing his wishes for his middle name, Aaron is the spelling his father chose for Presley's tombstone, and it is the spelling his estate has designated as official.[5]
^ Of the $40,000, $5,000 covered back royalties owed by Sun.[87]
^ In 1956 57, Presley was also credited as a co-writer on several songs where he had no hand in the writing process: "Heartbreak Hotel"; "Don't Be Cruel"; all four songs from his first film, including the title track, "Love Me Tender"; "Paralyzed"; and "All Shook Up".[90] (Parker, however, failed to register Presley with such musical licensing firms as ASCAP and its rival BMI, which eventually denied Presley annuity from songwriter's royalties.) He received credit on two other songs to which he did contribute: he provided the title for "That's Someone You Never Forget" (1961), written by his friend and former Humes schoolmate Red West; Presley and West collaborated with another friend, guitarist Charlie Hodge, on "You'll Be Gone" (1962).[91]
^ VH1 ranked Presley No. 8 among the "100 Greatest Artists of Rock & Roll" in 1998.[439] The BBC ranked him as the No. 2 "Voice of the Century" in 2001.[440] Rolling Stone placed him No. 3 in its list of "The Immortals: The Fifty Greatest Artists of All Time" in 2004.[441] CMT ranked him No. 15 among the "40 Greatest Men in Country Music" in 2005.[442] The Discovery Channel placed him No. 8 on its "Greatest American" list in 2005.[443] Variety put him in the top ten of its "100 Icons of the Century" in 2005.[444] The Atlantic ranked him No. 66 among the "100 Most Influential Figures in American History" in 2006.[445]
^ Whitburn follows actual Billboard history in considering the four songs on the "Don't Be Cruel/Hound Dog" and "Don't/I Beg of You" singles as distinct. He tallies each side of the former single as a number-one (Billboard's sales chart had "Don't Be Cruel" at number one for five weeks, then "Hound Dog" for six) and reckons "I Beg of You" as a top ten, as it reached number eight on the old Top 100 chart. Billboard now considers both singles as unified items, ignoring the historical sales split of the former and its old Top 100 chart entirely. Whitburn thus analyzes the four songs as yielding three number ones and a total of four top tens. Billboard now states that they yielded just two number ones and a total of two top tens, voiding the separate chart appearances of "Hound Dog" and "I Beg of You".
References
Citations
^ a b c US Department of Defense 1960.
^ Elster 2006, p. 391.
^ a b Nash 2005, p. 11.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, p. 13.
^ a b Adelman 2002, pp. 13 15.
^ a b Billboard writer Arnold Shaw, cited in Denisoff 1975, p. 22.
^ Brown & Broeske 1997, p. 55.
^ a b Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, p. 3.
^ Earl 2017.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, pp. 12 14.
^ Kamphoefner 2009, p. 33.
^ Dundy 2004, p. 60.
^ Dundy 2004, pp. 13, 16, 20 22, 26.
^ Dundy 2004, p. 301.
^ Nash 2005, pp. 2, 188.
^ Keogh 2008, p. 222.
^ Keough 2017.
^ Dundy 2004, pp. xv, 13, 16.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 11 12, 23 24.
^ Victor 2008, p. 419.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 15 16.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 17 18.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 19.
^ Dundy 2004, p. 101.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 23.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 23 26.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 19 21.
^ Dundy 2004, pp. 95 96.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 32 33.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 36.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 35 38.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 40 41.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 20.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 43, 44, 49.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 44, 46, 51.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 52 53.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, p. 171.
^ a b Matthew-Walker 1979, p. 3.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 46 48, 358.
^ Wadey 2004.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 47 48, 77 78.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 38 40.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 51.
^ a b c d e Guralnick 2004.
^ Bertrand 2000, p. 205.
^ Szatmary 1996, p. 35.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 54.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 8.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 62 64.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 65.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 77.
^ Cusic 1988, p. 10.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 80.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 83.
^ Miller 2000, p. 72.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 10 11.
^ Marcus 1982, p. 174.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 94 97.
^ Ponce de Leon 2007, p. 43.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, pp. 100 101.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 102 104.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 105, 139.
^ Miller 2021.
^ Rodman 2013, p. 151.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 106, 108 111.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, p. 110.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 117 127, 131.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 119.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 128 130.
^ Mason 2007, pp. 37 38.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 127 128, 135 142.
^ Burke & Griffin 2006, pp. 61, 176.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 152, 156, 182.
^ Everet 1977.
^ Blazeski 2017.
^ Poch  2017.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, pp. 144, 159, 167 168.
^ a b Nash 2003, pp. 6 12.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 163.
^ Bertrand 2000, p. 104.
^ Hopkins 2007, p. 53.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, p. 45.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 29.
^ Rogers 1982, p. 41.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 217 119.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 31.
^ a b Stanley & Coffey 1998, pp. 28 29.
^ Escott 1998, p. 421.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 36, 54.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 35, 51, 57, 61, 75.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 157 158, 166, 168.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 29.
^ a b c Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 30.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 235 136.
^ Slaughter & Nixon 2004, p. 21.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, pp. 50, 54, 64.
^ Hilburn 2005.
^ Rodman 1996, p. 28.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 262 263.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 267.
^ Koch, Manning & Toplikar 2008.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 274.
^ a b Victor 2008, p. 315.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, pp. 72 73.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 273, 284.
^ Fensch 2001, pp. 14 18.
^ a b Burke & Griffin 2006, p. 52.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 49.
^ Gould 1956.
^ a b Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, p. 73.
^ a b c d e Marcus 2006.
^ Marsh 1982, p. 100.
^ Austen 2005, p. 13.
^ Allen 1992, p. 270.
^ Rock 'N Roll Stars 1956, p. 5.
^ Keogh 2004, p. 73.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 51.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, pp. 80 81.
^ Whitburn 1993, p. 5.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 60 65.
^ a b Austen 2005, p. 16.
^ Edgerton 2007, p. 187.
^ Brown & Broeske 1997, p. 93.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 338.
^ a b Gibson 2005.
^ a b Victor 2008, p. 439.
^ Jezer 1982, p. 281.
^ Moore & Dickerson 1997, p. 175.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 343.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 335.
^ a b Marsh 1980, p. 395.
^ O'Malley 2016.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 71.
^ Palladino 1996, p. 131.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 37.
^ Clayton & Heard 2003, pp. 117 118.
^ Keogh 2004, p. 90.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, p. 95.
^ Salisbury 1957, p. 4.
^ Google Maps.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 395 397.
^ Nix 2019.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 406 408, 452.
^ Fox 1986, p. 178.
^ Leigh 2017, p. 187.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 399 402, 428 430, 437 440.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, p. 400.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, p. 430.
^ Turner 2004, p. 104.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 437.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 431.
^ Grein 2008.
^ Caulfield 2016.
^ Baird 2017.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 431 435.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 448 449.
^ a b Fox 1986, p. 179.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 99, 105.
^ Billboard 1965.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 461 474.
^ Victor 2008, p. 27.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 106 111.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 474 480.
^ Neibaur 2014, p. 51.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 21.
^ BudoDragon 2021.
^ Tillery 2013, p. 60.
^ Eiland 2018.
^ Corcoran 1998.
^ Tillery 2013, Chapter 5: Patriot.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 47, 49, 55, 60, 73.
^ Clayton & Heard 2003, p. 160.
^ Jeffrey 2022.
^ Presley 1985, p. 40.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 107.
^ Whitburn 2010, p. 520.
^ Marcus 1982, p. 278.
^ Matthew-Walker 1979, p. 49.
^ Slaughter & Nixon 2004, p. 54.
^ Matthew-Walker 1979, p. 19.
^ Slaughter & Nixon 2004, p. 57.
^ Marcus 1982, pp. 279 280.
^ Robertson 2004, p. 50.
^ "Red Carpet" 1960.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 124 127, 414.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 44, 62 63.
^ Gordon 2005, pp. 110, 114.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 148.
^ Robertson 2004, p. 52.
^ Gordon 2005, pp. 110, 119.
^ Ponce de Leon 2007, p. 133.
^ Caine 2005, p. 21.
^ Fields 2007.
^ a b Guralnick 1994, p. 449.
^ Kirchberg & Hendrickx 1999, p. 67.
^ Lisanti 2000, pp. 19, 136.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 201.
^ Hopkins 2002, p. 32.
^ Matthew-Walker 1979, p. 66.
^ Marsh 2004, p. 650.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 261 263.
^ Kirchberg & Hendrickx 1999, p. 73.
^ a b Keogh 2004, p. 263.
^ Rolling Stone 2009.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 171.
^ Whitburn 2010, p. 521.
^ Kubernick 2008, p. 4.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 293, 296.
^ a b c Kubernick 2008, p. 26.
^ a b Hopkins 2007, p. 215.
^ Marsh 2004, p. 649.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 277.
^ Marsh 1980, p. 396.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 419.
^ Gordon 2005, p. 146.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 283.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 343.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 346 347.
^ Gordon 2005, pp. 149 150.
^ Cook 2004, p. 39.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, pp. 259, 262.
^ Moyer 2002, p. 73.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 287.
^ Whitburn 2010, pp. 521 522.
^ a b Stein 1997.
^ Mason 2007, p. 81.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 94.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 95.
^ Hopkins 2007, p. 253.
^ Hopkins 2007, p. 254.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 96.
^ Robertson 2004, p. 70.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 99.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 419 422.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 284, 286, 307 308, 313, 326, 338, 357 358.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 420.
^ The Beatles 2000, p. 192.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 321.
^ McPhate 2017.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, pp. 299 300.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 319.
^ Marcus 1982, pp. 284 185.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, p. 308.
^ Marcus 1982, p. 283.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 478.
^ Williamson 2015, pp. 253 254.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 451, 446, 453.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 456.
^ Marsh 2015.
^ Hopkins 2007, p. 291.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 474.
^ Moscheo 2007, p. 132.
^ Keogh 2004, pp. 234 235.
^ Hopkins 2002, pp. 61, 67, 73.
^ Hopkins 2002, p. 73.
^ Victor 2008, p. 10.
^ Brown & Broeske 1997, p. 364.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 475.
^ Fessier 2013.
^ Mason 2007, p. 141.
^ RIAA 2010.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 422 425.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 488 490.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, p. 329.
^ a b c d e Higginbotham 2002.
^ Keogh 2004, p. 238.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 481, 487, 499, 504, 519 520.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 547.
^ a b Hopkins 1986, p. 136.
^ Garber 1997, p. 364.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 50, 148.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 601 604.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 139.
^ Hopkins 2007, p. 354.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 140.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 560.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, p. 336.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 381.
^ a b Grammy 2014.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 584 585.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 593 595.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 595.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 397.
^ Caulfield 2004.
^ a b c Whitburn 2006, p. 273.
^ Marcus 1982, p. 284.
^ Marsh 1989, p. 430.
^ Victor 2008, pp. 8, 526.
^ Victor 2008, pp. 8, 224, 325.
^ Scherman 2006.
^ Greene 2018.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 628.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 628 630.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 634.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 212, 642.
^ a b Guralnick 1999, p. 638.
^ Harrison 2016, p. 23.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 148.
^ Humphries 2003, p. 79.
^ Alden 2014.
^ Williamson 2014, p. 18.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 645 648.
^ Harrison 2016, p. 242.
^ a b Woolley & Peters 1977.
^ Hopkins 2007, p. 386.
^ a b Guralnick 1999, p. 660.
^ Victor 2008, pp. 581 582.
^ Matthew-Walker 1979, p. 26.
^ Pendergast & Pendergast 2000, p. 108.
^ Warwick, Kutner & Brown 2004, pp. 860 866.
^ a b c Ramsland 2010.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 651 653.
^ a b Baden & Hennessee 1990, p. 35.
^ Tennant 2013, p. 2.
^ Williamson 2015, pp. 11 14.
^ Coffey 1997, p. 247.
^ Wertheimer 1997, p. 132.
^ Tennant 2013.
^ Guardian 2014.
^ Brown & Broeske 1997, p. 433.
^ National Park Service 2010.
^ Cook 2004, p. 33.
^ Garrity 2002.
^ Bronson 2004, p. 1.
^ "Hits of the World" 2004.
^ Sexton 2007.
^ Goldman & Ewalt 2007.
^ Rose 2006.
^ Goldman & Paine 2007.
^ Hoy 2008.
^ Pomerantz et al. 2009.
^ Rose et al. 2010.
^ Baillie 2010.
^ Bouchard 2010.
^ Lynch 2011.
^ Pomerantz 2011.
^ Greenburg 2017.
^ Legacy 2018.
^ Box Office Mojo.
^ Davoren 2023.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 14.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 47 48.
^ Bertrand 2000, p. 211.
^ Graceland Blog 2015.
^ Roberts 2001, p. [page needed].
^ Osborne 2017, p. 73.
^ Duffett 2018, p. 189.
^ Murray 1961, p. 65.
^ Marcus 2015, p. 341.
^ Trynka & Bacon 1996, p. 42.
^ Eder 2013, p. 149.
^ Morrison 1996, p. x.
^ a b Friedlander 1996, p. 45.
^ Charlton 2006, p. 103.
^ Jancik 1998, p. 16.
^ Campbell 2009, p. 161.
^ Guralnick 1989, p. 104.
^ Gillett 2000, p. 113.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 39.
^ Wolfe 1994, p. 14.
^ Wolfe 1994, p. 22.
^ Keogh 2004, p. 184.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 123.
^ Marsh 1982, p. 145.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 213, 237.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 65.
^ Jorgensen 1998, pp. 142 143.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 343.
^ Ponce de Leon 2007, p. 199.
^ Marsh 1982, p. 234.
^ Marsh 1989, p. 317.
^ Marsh 1989, p. 91.
^ Marsh 1989, p. 490.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 212.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 232.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 231.
^ Marsh 1989, p. 424.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 271.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 332.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 335.
^ a b c d Pleasants 2004, p. 260.
^ Waters 2003, p. 205.
^ Williams 2012.
^ a b Pilgrim 2006.
^ Guralnick 1994, p. 426.
^ a b Kolawole 2002.
^ a b Myrie 2009, pp. 123 124.
^ The Age 2002.
^ Masley 2004.
^ Masley 2002.
^ Osborne 2000, p. 207.
^ Bertrand 2000, p. 198.
^ a b Feeney 2010.
^ Ashley 2009, p. 76.
^ Rodman 1996, p. 58.
^ Rodman 1996, pp. 58 59.
^ Garber 1997, p. 366.
^ Dyer 1959 1960, p. 30.
^ Farmer 2000, p. 86.
^ Tasker 2007, p. 208.
^ Kirchberg & Hendrickx 1999, p. 109.
^ Moncrease 2020.
^ Altieri 2017.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 415 417, 448 449.
^ Guralnick 1994, pp. 452 453.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 198.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 248.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, pp. 304, 365.
^ Guralnick & Jorgensen 1999, pp. 358, 375.
^ Presley 1985, p. 188.
^ a b Nash 2005, p. 290.
^ Dowd 2022.
^ Clayton & Heard 2003, pp. 262 265.
^ Clayton & Heard 2003, p. 267.
^ Jorgensen 1998, p. 281.
^ Nash 2003, p. 186.
^ Nash 2003, p. 187.
^ Nash 2005, pp. 64, 478.
^ Stanley & Coffey 1998, p. 123.
^ Hopkins 2007, p. 192.
^ Brown & Broeske 1997, p. 125.
^ Clayton & Heard 2003, p. 226.
^ Guralnick 1999, pp. 563 565.
^ Ponce de Leon 2007, pp. 139 140.
^ Harris 2006.
^ Clayton & Heard 2003, p. 339.
^ Connelly 2008, p. 148.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 174.
^ Guralnick 1999, p. 175.
^ Christgau 1985.
^ Collins 2002.
^ Sadie 1994, p. 638.
^ Bertrand 2000, p. 94.
^ Rodman 1996, p. 193.
^ a b Victor 2008, p. 356.
^ Arnett 2006, p. 400.
^ Doss 1999, p. 2.
^ Lott 1997, p. 192.
^ VH1 1998.
^ BBC News 2001.
^ Rolling Stone 2004.
^ CMT 2005.
^ Discovery Channel 2005.
^ Variety.com 2005.
^ Atlantic 2006.
^ Keogh 2004, p. 2.
^ Davies 1996, p. 19.
^ Nash 2005, p. xv.
^ Harrison 2016, p. 149.
^ Cosby 2016, p. 144.
^ Doll 2016, p. 186.
^ a b Martin 2000.
^ Smith 2002.
^ Dundy 2004, pp. 227, 256.
^ Wilson 2010, p. 121.
^ Slater 2002.
^ Milly 2002.
^ Harrison 1992, pp. 42, 157 160, 169.
^ Clarke 2006, pp. 77, 80.
^ Harrison 1992, pp. 159 160.
^ a b Harrison 2016, p. 10.
^ Segr  2002.
^ New York Times 2002.
^ Marcus 1982, pp. 141 142.
^ Reuters 2022.
^ a b c Whitburn 2010, p. 875.
^ a b c Victor 2008, p. 438.
^ a b c Trust 2019.
^ Hilburn 2007.
^ Hasty 2008.
^ Trust 2022.
^ Moody 2008.
^ Whitburn 2010, p. 876.
^ RRHF 2010.
^ Trust 2023.
^ Myers 2022.
^ Myers 2021.
^ Trust 2015.
^ Sexton 2016.
^ RIAA 2020a.
^ RIAA 2020b.
^ RIAA 2020c.
^ RIAA 2020d.
^ Lewis 2017.
^ RIAA 2020e.
^ RIAA 2020f.
^ Miller et al. 2012.
^ BBC News 2018.
General sources
Adelman, Kim (2002). The Girls' Guide to Elvis: The Clothes, the Hair, the Women, and More!. Random House. ISBN 978-0-7679-1188-7.
Alden, Ginger (2014). Elvis & Ginger: Elvis Presley's Fianc e and Last Love Finally Tells her Story. New York: Berkeley Publishing. ISBN 978-1-101-61613-0.
Allen, Steve (1992). Hi-Ho, Steverino!: My Adventures in the Wonderful Wacky World of TV. Thorndike Press. ISBN 978-1-56054-521-7.
Altieri, Marion E. (August 8, 2017). "Review: All the King's Horses: the Equestrian Life of Elvis Presley by Kimberly Gatto and Victoria Racimo". Equine Info Exchange.
Arnett, Jeffrey Jensen (2006). Adolescence and Emerging Adulthood: A Cultural Approach (3rd ed.). Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-195071-9.
Ashley, Martin (2009). How High Should Boys Sing?. Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-6475-8.
"The Top 100". The Atlantic. December 2006. Retrieved January 19, 2018.
Austen, Jake (2005). TV-A-Go-Go: Rock on TV from American Bandstand to American Idol. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-572-8.
Baden, Michael M.; Hennessee, Judith Adler (1990). Unnatural Death: Confessions of a Medical Examiner. Ballantine. ISBN 978-0-8041-0599-6.
Baillie, Russell (November 6, 2010). "Album Review: Elvis Presley Viva Elvis The Album". New Zealand Herald. Retrieved November 9, 2010.
Baird, Robert (December 23, 2017). "Elvis and the Royal Philharmonic". Stereophile. Retrieved January 17, 2018.
"Sinatra Is Voice of the Century". BBC News. April 18, 2001. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
"Elvis Presley gets US Presidential Medal of Freedom". BBC News. November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2018.
The Beatles (2000). The Beatles Anthology. Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-2684-6.
Bertrand, Michael T (2000). Race, Rock, and Elvis. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02586-0.
"Bill Black Dies at 39". Billboard. October 30, 1965. p. 8.
Blazeski, Goran (April 23, 2017). "Elvis Presley performed in a TV commercial in exchange for a box of hot glazed doughnuts". The Vintage News. Retrieved September 21, 2018.
Bouchard, Dany (November 5, 2010). "Priscilla Presley Keeps King Alive". Toronto Sun. Retrieved November 9, 2010.
"Elvis (2022)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 15, 2022.
Bronson, Fred (May 9, 1998). "Chart Beat". Billboard. p. 94.
Bronson, Fred (July 3, 2004). "Chart Beat". Billboard. p. 57.
Brown, Peter Harry; Broeske, Pat H. (1997). Down at the End of Lonely Street: The Life and Death of Elvis Presley. Signet. ISBN 978-0-451-19094-9.
"How good was Elvis Presley at Karate?". BudoDragon. April 21, 2021. Retrieved April 22, 2021.
Duffett, Mark (2018). Counting Down Elvis: His 100 Finest Songs. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4422-4805-2.
Burke, Ken; Griffin, Dan (2006). The Blue Moon Boys: The Story of Elvis Presley's Band. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-614-5.
Caine, Andrew (2005). Interpreting Rock Movies: The Pop Film and Its Critics in Britain. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-7190-6538-5.
Campbell, Michael (2009). Popular Music in America (3rd ed.).
Caulfield, Keith (September 18, 2004). "The King of Crossover's No. 1 Hits". Billboard. p. 24.
Caulfield, Keith (November 25, 2016). "Popular Demand". Billboard. Retrieved January 17, 2018.
Charlton, Katherine (2006). Rock Music Styles: A History (5th ed.). McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-312162-8.
Christgau, Robert (December 24, 1985). "Christgau's Consumer Guide". The Village Voice. New York. Retrieved August 26, 2012.
Clarke, Steve (2006). ""Conspiracy Theories and Conspiracy Theorizing"".  In Coady, David (ed.). Conspiracy Theories: The Philosophical Debate. Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-5250-2.
Clayton, Dick; Heard, James (2003). Elvis: By Those Who Knew Him Best. Virgin Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7535-0835-0.
"40 Greatest Men in Country Music". CMT. 2005. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
Coffey, Frank (1997). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Elvis. New York: Alpha Books.
Collins, Dan (August 7, 2002). "How Big Was The King?". CBS News/Associated Press. Retrieved December 27, 2009.
Connelly, Charlie (2008). In Search of Elvis: A Journey to Find the Man Beneath the Jumpsuit. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-349-11900-7.
Cook, Jody (2004). Graceland National Historic Landmark Nomination Form (PDF). United States Department of the Interior.
Corcoran, John (March 1, 1998). "The King and Karate". Black Belt. pp. 48 54. Retrieved December 17, 2017.
Cosby, James A. (2016). Devil's Music, Holy Rollers and Hillbillies: How America Gave Birth to Rock and Roll. McFarland. ISBN 978-1-4766-6229-9.
Cusic, Don (Summer 1988). "Singing with the King". Rejoice! The Gospel Music Magazine.
Davies, Hunter (1996). The Beatles (2nd rev. ed.). W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-31571-4.
Denisoff, R. Serge (1975). Solid Gold: The Popular Record Industry. Transaction Books. ISBN 978-0-87855-586-4.
Davoren, Haley (January 9, 2023). "Elvis Presley's Lockheed 1329 JetStar sells at auction for $260,000". Globalair.com. Retrieved January 11, 2023.
"Greatest American". Discovery Channel. 2005. Archived from the original on January 29, 2010. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
Doll, Susan (2016). Understanding Elvis: Southern Roots vs. Star Image. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-8153-3164-3.
Doss, Erika Lee (1999). Elvis Culture: Fans, Faith, and Image. University of Kansas Press. ISBN 978-0-7006-0948-2.
Dowd, Maureen (May 22, 2022). "A Larger-Than-Life Look at a Larger-Than-Life Star". The New York Times. pp. ST10. Retrieved May 22, 2022.
Dundy, Elaine (2004). Elvis and Gladys (2nd ed.). University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-57806-634-6.
Dyer, Peter John (Winter 1959 60). "The Teenage Rave". Sight and Sound.
Earl, Jennifer (February 14, 2017). "19 celebrities you didn't know were twins (Elvis and Jesse Presley)". CBS News. Retrieved July 12, 2020.
Eder, Mike (2013). Elvis Music FAQ: All That's Left to Know About the King's Recorded Works. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-1-61713-580-4.
Edgerton, Gary R. (2007). The Columbia History of American Television. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12165-1.
Eiland, Murray (2018). "Elvis Presley's Coat of Arms". The Armiger's News. Vol. 41, no. 1. p. 6   via academia.edu.
Elster, Charles Harrington (2006). The Big Book of Beastly Mispronunciations. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-42315-6.
Escott, Colin (1998). ""Elvis Presley"".  In Kingsbury, Paul (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Country Music. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-517608-7.
Everet, Todd (August 17, 1977). "Elvis Presley, 42, Found Dead in His Memphis Mansion". Variety. Retrieved September 21, 2018.
Farmer, Brett (2000). Spectacular Passions: Cinema, Fantasy, Gay Male Spectatorships (2nd ed.). Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-2589-5.
Feeney, Mark (January 3, 2010). "Elvis at 75: Can We Ever Again See the Performer, Not the Punch Line?". The Boston Globe. Retrieved February 1, 2010.
Fensch, Thomas (2001). The FBI Files on Elvis Presley. New Century Books. ISBN 978-0-930751-03-6.
Fessier, Bruce (May 10, 2013). "Director Remembers Landmark Elvis Presley Performance". USA Today. Retrieved January 19, 2018.
Fields, Curt (August 3, 2007). "A Whole Lotta Elvis Is Goin' to the Small Screen". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 27, 2009.
Fox, Ted (1986). In the Groove: The People Behind the Music. St Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-01776-7.
Friedlander, Paul (1996). Rock and Roll: A Social History. Westview. ISBN 978-0-8133-2725-9.
Garber, Marjorie (1997). Vested Interests: Cross-Dressing and Cultural Anxiety. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-91951-7.
Garrity, Brian (October 12, 2002). "King's Crown Shines: First No. 1 Debut". Billboard. pp. 1, 3.
Gibson, Christine (December 6, 2005). "Elvis on Ed Sullivan: The Real Story". American Heritage. Archived from the original on May 15, 2009. Retrieved December 31, 2009.
Gillett, Charlie (2000). "The Five Styles of Rock'n'Roll".  In McKeen, William (ed.). Rock and Roll Is Here To Stay: An Anthology. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-04700-4.
Goldman, Lea; Ewalt, David M. (October 29, 2007). "Top-Earning Dead Celebrities". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008. Retrieved January 5, 2010.
Goldman, Lea; Paine, Jake (October 29, 2007). "Top-Earning Dead Celebrities". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 26, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2011.
"Graceland to Downtown Memphis". Google Maps. Retrieved March 10, 2021.
Gordon, Robert (2005). The King on the Road. Bounty Books. ISBN 978-0-7537-1088-3.
Gould, Jack (June 6, 1956). "TV: New Phenomenon  Elvis Presley Rises to Fame as Vocalist Who Is Virtuoso of Hootchy-Kootchy" (PDF). The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2009.
"Elvis Presley, the Musician". Graceland Blog. December 3, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2019.
"Elvis Presley". Grammy. March 17, 2014. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (October 30, 2017). "The Top-Earning Dead Celebrities of 2017". Forbes. Retrieved January 8, 2018.
Greene, Andy (July 31, 2018). "Flashback: Elvis Presley's 'Aloha From Hawaii' Marks His Final Truly Great Moment". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 17, 2023.
Grein, Paul (December 5, 2008). "Chart Watch Extra: The Top 40 Christmas Albums". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on December 24, 2011. Retrieved February 1, 2010.
"Channel 4 Show 'Discovers Cause of Elvis Presley's Death'". The Guardian. March 25, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Guffey, Elizabeth E. (2006). Retro: The Culture of Revival. Reaktion. ISBN 978-1-86189-290-4.
"Best-selling solo artist". Guinness World Records. Retrieved August 3, 2021.
Guralnick, Peter (1989). Lost Highway: Journeys & Arrivals of American Musicians. Vintage. ISBN 978-0-394-75215-0.
Guralnick, Peter (1994). Last Train to Memphis: The Rise of Elvis Presley. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-33225-5.
Guralnick, Peter (1999). Careless Love: The Unmaking of Elvis Presley. Back Bay Books. ISBN 978-0-316-33297-2.
Guralnick, Peter (January 8, 2004). "How Did Elvis Get Turned into a Racist?". The New York Times. Retrieved August 11, 2007.
Guralnick, Peter; Jorgensen, Ernst (1999). Elvis Day by Day: The Definitive Record of His Life and Music. Ballantine. ISBN 978-0-345-42089-3.
Harris, John (March 27, 2006). "Talking about Graceland". The Guardian. Retrieved January 4, 2010.
Harrison, Ted (1992). Elvis People: The Cult of the King. Fount. ISBN 978-0-00-627620-3.
Harrison, Ted (2016). The Death and Resurrection of Elvis Presley. Reaktion. ISBN 978-1-78023-637-7.
Hasty, Katie (May 7, 2008). "Madonna Leads Busy Billboard 200 with 7th No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Higginbotham, Alan (August 11, 2002). "Doctor Feelgood". The Observer. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
Hilburn, Robert (February 6, 2005). "From the Man Who Would Be King". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 4, 2010.
Hilburn, Robert (October 30, 2007). "This Fan of Charts Is No. 1, with a Bullet". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 17, 2010.
"Hits of the World". Billboard. July 24, 2004. p. 62.
Hopkins, Jerry (1986). Elvis: The Final Years. Berkley. ISBN 978-0-425-08999-6.
Hopkins, Jerry (2002). Elvis in Hawaii. Bess Press. ISBN 978-1-57306-142-1.
Hopkins, Jerry (2007). Elvis  The Biography. Plexus. ISBN 978-0-85965-391-6.
Hoy, Peter (October 27, 2008). "Top-Earning Dead Celebrities". Forbes. Retrieved June 5, 2011.
Humphries, Patrick (2003). Elvis the No. 1 Hits: The Secret History of the Classics. Andrews McMeel Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7407-3803-6.
Jancik, Wayne (1998). The Billboard Book of One-Hit Wonders.
Jeffrey, Joyann. "Priscilla Presley and Elvis Presley's relationship story, in their own words". TODAY.com. Retrieved February 26, 2023.
Jezer, Marty (1982). The Dark Ages: Life in the United States 1945 1960. South End Press. ISBN 978-0-89608-127-7.
Jorgensen, Ernst (1998). Elvis Presley  A Life in Music: The Complete Recording Sessions. St Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-18572-5.
Kamphoefner, Walter D (2010). ""Elvis and Other Germans: Some Reflections and Modest Proposals on the Study of German-American Ethnicity" (2009)".  In Kluge, Cora Lee (ed.). Paths Crossing: Essays in German-American Studies. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-0343-0221-0.
Kennedy, Victor; Gadpaille, Michelle (2017). Ethnic and Cultural Identity in Music and Song Lyrics. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 9781443896207.
Keogh, Pamela Clarke (2004). Elvis Presley: The Man, The Life, The Legend. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7434-5603-6.
Keogh, Pamela Clarke (2008). Elvis Presley: The Man, The Life, The Legend. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4391-0815-4.
Keough, Riley [@rileykeough] (July 19, 2017). "I had one great grandma who was creek and one who was full blood Cherokee" (Tweet). Retrieved October 10, 2021   via Twitter.
Kirchberg, Connie; Hendrickx, Marc (1999). Elvis Presley, Richard Nixon, and the American Dream. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-0716-3.
Koch, Ed; Manning, Mary; Toplikar, Dave (May 15, 2008). "Showtime: How Sin City evolved into 'The Entertainment Capital of the World'". Las Vegas Sun. Retrieved March 3, 2019.
Kolawole, Helen (August 15, 2002). "He Wasn't My King". The Guardian. Retrieved December 27, 2009.
Kubernick, Harvey (2008). The Complete '68 Comeback Special. CD Booklet RCA/BMG. UPC 88697306262.
"Groundbreaking New Elvis Presley Album, 'Where No One Stands Alone', To Be Released August 10". Legacy. Sony Music Entertainment. June 21, 2018. Retrieved January 30, 2022.
Leigh, Spencer (2017). Elvis Presley: Caught in a Trap. McNidder and Grace. ISBN 978-0-8571-6166-6.
Lewis, Randy (August 16, 2017). "40 Years After His Death, Elvis Presley Is Still the King in the YouTube Age". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 19, 2018.
Lisanti, Tom (2000). Fantasy Femmes of 60s Cinema: Interviews with 20 Actresses from Biker, Beach, and Elvis Movies. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-0868-9.
Lott, Eric; Uebel, Michael (1997). ""All the King's Men: Elvis Impersonators and White Working-Class Masculinity"".  In Stecopoulos, Harry (ed.). Race and the Subject of Masculinities. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-1966-5.
Lynch, Rene (August 16, 2011). "Elvis Presley, Who Died 34 Years Ago Today, Spurs Fresh Tears". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 17, 2011.
Marcus, Greil (1982). Mystery Train: Images of America in Rock 'n' Roll Music (Revised ed.). E.P. Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-47708-2.
Marcus, Greil (2006). Elvis Presley: The Ed Sullivan Shows. DVD Booklet Image Entertainment. UPC 01438137302. Archived from the original on December 19, 2011. Retrieved February 1, 2010.
Marcus, Greil (2015). Mystery Train: Images of America in Rock 'n' Roll Music. Plume. ISBN 978-0-14-218158-4.
Marsh, Dave (1980). "Elvis Presley".  In Marsh, Dave; Swenson, John (eds.). The Rolling Stone Record Guide (2nd ed.). Virgin. ISBN 978-0-907080-00-8.
Marsh, Dave (1982). Elvis. Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8129-0947-0.
Marsh, Dave (1989). The Heart of Rock & Soul: The 1001 Greatest Singles Ever Made. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-012108-7.
Marsh, Dave (2004). ""Elvis Presley"".  In Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian (eds.). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide (4th ed.). Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-0169-8.
Marsh, Stefanie (December 21, 2015). "Did Elvis indoctrinate me? Probably  but I don't see it as a bad thing". The Times.
Martin, Douglas (June 5, 2000). "Mary Jenkins Langston, 78, Cook for Presley". The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Masley, Ed (July 4, 2004). "Elvis may have been the king, but was he first". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014.
Masley, Ed (August 15, 2002). "It's Good To Be King". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved January 31, 2010.
Mason, Bobbie Ann (2007). Elvis Presley. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303889-4.
Matthew-Walker, Robert (1979). Elvis Presley. A Study in Music. Midas Books. ISBN 978-0-85936-162-0.
McPhate, Tim (August 15, 2017). "Elvis: Do You Know These 5 Facts?". Grammy. Retrieved January 9, 2019.
Miller J, Griswold C, Scharff N, Rezac M, Szuts T, Marhabaie M (May 18, 2012). "The velvet spiders: an atlas of the Eresidae (Arachnida, Araneae)". ZooKeys (195): 1 144. doi:10.3897/zookeys.195.2342. ISSN 1313-2970. PMC 3361087. PMID 22679386.
Miller, James (2000). Flowers in the Dustbin: The Rise of Rock and Roll, 1947 1977. Fireside. ISBN 978-0-684-86560-7.
Miller, Madison (March 23, 2021). "Elvis Presley: How the King of Rock 'n' Roll Developed His Signature Dance Moves". Outsider. Retrieved February 14, 2022.
Milly, Jenna (August 26, 2002). "A Hunka-Hunka Fried Peanut Butter". CNN. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Mohamed, Maryam (March 14, 2021). "An iconic guitar from Elvis Presley's Comeback Special is up for auction". CNN.
Moncrease, Brittani (January 27, 2020). "Meet the Former Teacher Who Also Serves as Graceland's Long-time Horse keeper". Equine Info Exchange.
Moody, Nekesa Mumbi (April 2, 2008). "Mariah Carey Surpasses Elvis in No. 1s". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved April 14, 2010.
Moore, Scotty; Dickerson, James (1997). That's Alright, Elvis. Schirmer Books. ISBN 978-0-02-864599-5.
Morrison, Craig (1996). Go Cat Go!: Rockabilly Music and Its Makers. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02207-4.
Moscheo, Joe (2007). The Gospel Side of Elvis. Center Street. ISBN 978-1-59995-729-6.
Moyer, Susan M. (2002). Elvis: The King Remembered. Sports Publishing LLC. ISBN 978-1-58261-558-5.
Murray, Don (October 1961). "One Million Times 98 ". HiFi/Stereo Review. Vol. 7, no. 4. Ziff-Davis Publishing Company. pp. 63 66.
Myers, Justin (September 30, 2022). "Artists with the most Number 1 singles on the UK chart". Official Charts. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved October 15, 2022.
Myers, Justin (September 17, 2021). "Artists with the most Top 10 singles in the UK". Official Charts. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved October 15, 2022.
Myrie, Russell (2009). Don't Rhyme for the Sake of Riddlin': The Authorized Story of Public Enemy. Canongate. ISBN 978-1-84767-182-0.
Nash, Alanna (2003). The Colonel: The Extraordinary Story of Colonel Tom Parker and Elvis Presley. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-1301-1.
Nash, Alanna (2005). Elvis and the Memphis Mafia. Aurum. ISBN 978-1-84513-128-9.
"Graceland". National Park Service. 2010. Archived from the original on December 30, 2011. Retrieved January 7, 2010.
Neibaur, James L. (2014). The Elvis Movies. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-3074-3.
"Long Live the King". The New York Times. August 16, 2002. Retrieved December 30, 2009.
Nickles, Liz; Iyer, Savita (2012). Brandstorm: Surviving and Thriving in the New Consumer-Led Marketplace. Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 9780230341685.
Nix, Elizabeth (August 7, 2019) [Jul 1, 2014]. "7 Fascinating Facts About Elvis Presley". HISTORY. Retrieved March 10, 2021.
O'Malley, Sheila (April 4, 2016). "Love Me Tender". Bright Wall/Dark Room. Retrieved January 17, 2018.
Osborne, Jerry (2000). Elvis: Word for Word. Harmony. ISBN 978-0-609-60803-6.
Osborne, Jerry (2017). Presleyana VIII   the Elvis Presley Record, CD, and Memorabilia Price Guide. Jerry Osborne Enterprises. ISBN 978-0-932117-97-7.
Palladino, Grace (1996). Teenagers: An American History. Westview. ISBN 978-0-465-00766-0.
Pendergast, Sara; Pendergast, Tom (2000). St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture (4th ed.). St. James Press. ISBN 978-1-55862-404-7.
Pilgrim, David (March 2006). "Question of the Month: Elvis Presley and Racism". Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2009.
Pleasants, Henry (2004). "Elvis Presley".  In Frith, Simon (ed.). Popular Music: Critical Concepts in Media and Cultural Studies, Volume 3: Popular Music Analysis. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-33269-9.
Poch , Dixie (2017). Louisiana Sweets: King Cakes, Bread Pudding & Sweet Dough Pie. Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4396-6217-5.
Pomerantz, Dorothy (October 25, 2011). "The Top-Earning Dead Celebrities". Forbes. Retrieved January 6, 2012.
Pomerantz, Dorothy; Lacey, Rose; Streib, Lauren; Thibault, Marie (October 27, 2009). "Top-Earning Dead Celebrities". Forbes. Retrieved January 5, 2010.
Ponce de Leon, Charles L. (2007). Fortunate Son: The Life of Elvis Presley. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-8090-1641-9.
Presley, Priscilla (1985). Elvis and Me. G.P. Putnam's Sons. ISBN 978-0-399-12984-1.
Ramsland, Katherine (2010). ""Cyril Wecht: Forensic Pathologist  Coverup for a King"". TruTV. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013.
"Universal Music can't help falling for Elvis Presley, to manage song catalog". Reuters. April 12, 2022. Retrieved March 19, 2023.
"Top 100 Albums". Recording Industry Association of America. 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2007. Retrieved January 31, 2010.
"Gold & Platinum: Top Artists (Albums)". Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020.
"Gold & Platinum: Artists  Albums/EPs (Gold)". Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020.
"Gold & Platinum: Artists  Albums/EPs (Platinum)". Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020.
"Gold & Platinum: Artists  Albums/EPs (Multi-Platinum)". Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020.
"Gold & Platinum: Artists  Singles (Gold)". Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020.
"Gold & Platinum: Artists  Singles (Platinum)". Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020.
"Red Carpet for Elvis LP". Billboard. April 18, 1960. p. 11.
Roberts, Jim (2001). How the Fender Bass Changed the World: By Jim Roberts. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-630-4.
Robertson, John (2004). Elvis Presley: The Complete Guide to His Music. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-711-9.
"Elvis Presley". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 2010. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2010.
"Elvis Presley: 'King of Rock'". Rock 'N Roll Stars. 1956. pp. 2 13. Via Jans Rabbers (July 11, 2013). "Rock 'N Roll Stars (1956)". Smelly Paper Vintage Magazines.
Rodman, Gilbert B. (1996). Elvis After Elvis, The Posthumous Career of a Living Legend. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-11002-0.
Rodman, G.B. (2013). Elvis After Elvis The Posthumous Career of a Living Legend. United Kingdom: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781136155062.
Rogers, Dave (1982). Rock 'n' Roll. Routledge & Kegan Paul. ISBN 978-0-7100-0938-8.
"The Immortals: The First Fifty". Rolling Stone. April 15, 2004. Archived from the original on June 25, 2008. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
"1969 Rolling Stone Covers". Rolling Stone. 2009. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved November 20, 2015.
Rose, Lacey (October 24, 2006). "Top-Earning Dead Celebrities". Forbes. Retrieved June 5, 2011.
Rose, Lacey; Pomerantz, Dorothy; Greenburg, Zack O'Malley; Paine, Jake (October 25, 2010). ""In Pictures: The 13 Top-Earning Dead Celebs  No. 2 Elvis Presley"". Forbes. Retrieved June 5, 2011.
Sadie, Stanley, ed. (1994). The Norton/Grove Concise Encyclopedia of Music (Revised ed.). W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-03753-1.
Salisbury, Harrison (February 3, 1957). "Presley Records a Craze in Soviet". The New York Times.
Scherman, Tony (August 16, 2006). "Elvis Dies". American Heritage. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
Segr , Gabriel (2002). "Le rite de la Candlelight". Ethnologie fran aise. 32: 149. doi:10.3917/ethn.021.0149.
Sexton, Paul (August 3, 2007). "New Presley Reissue Campaign Aimed at U.K." Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2018.
Sexton, Paul (October 28, 2016). "The King Reigns Again as Elvis Presley Takes U.K. Album Honors". Billboard. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Slater, Nigel (August 11, 2002). "Grease Is the Word". The Guardian. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Slaughter, Todd; Anne E. Nixon (2004). The Elvis Archives. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-380-7.
Smith, Liz (November 10, 2002). "Ain't Nothin' but a Chow Hound". The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Stanley, David; Coffey, Frank (1998). The Elvis Encyclopedia. Virgin Books. ISBN 978-0-7535-0293-8.
Stein, Ruthe (August 3, 1997). "Girls! Girls! Girls!". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
Szatmary, David (1996). A Time to Rock: A Social History of Rock 'n' Roll. Schirmer Books. ISBN 978-0-02-864670-1.
Tasker, Yvonne (2007). ""Cowgirl Tales"".  In Codell, Julie F. (ed.). Genre, Gender, Race, and World Cinema: An Anthology. Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-3232-9.
Tennant, Forest (June 2013). "Elvis Presley: Head Trauma, Autoimmunity, Pain, and Early Death". Practical Pain Management. Retrieved January 9, 2018.
"Chuck Hails the King". The Age. August 13, 2002. Archived from the original on April 18, 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014.
Tillery, Gary (2013). The Seeker King: A Spiritual Biography of Elvis Presley. Quest Books. ISBN 978-0-8356-0915-9. Retrieved February 2, 2018.
Trust, Gary (June 2, 2010). "Chart Beat". Billboard. Retrieved July 22, 2010.
Trust, Gary (January 8, 2015). "Elvis Presley's Billboard Chart Records". Billboard. Retrieved April 5, 2023.
Trust, Gary (January 1, 2019). "Elvis Presley Earns Highest-Charting Billboard Hot 100 Hit Since 1981 as 'Blue Christmas' Jingles In at No. 40". Billboard. Retrieved July 1, 2019.
Trust, Gary (June 27, 2022). "Drake & 21 Savage's 'Jimmy Cooks' Soars in at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved March 19, 2023.
Trust, Gary (January 3, 2023). "Mariah Carey's 'All I Want for Christmas Is You' Adds 12th Week Atop Hot 100, Nat King Cole Hits Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved March 19, 2023.
Trynka, Paul; Bacon, Tony (1996). Rock Hardware. Balafon Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-428-7.
Turner, John Frayn (2004). Frank Sinatra. Taylor Trade Publications. ISBN 978-1-58979-145-9.
Presley, Elvis Aron; DD 214: Armed Forces of the United States Report of Transfer or Discharge. US Department of Defense. March 5, 1960.
"100 Icons of the Century". Variety.com. 2005. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
"100 Greatest Artists of Rock & Roll". VH1. 1998. Retrieved December 29, 2009.
Victor, Adam (2008). The Elvis Encyclopedia. Overlook Duckworth. ISBN 978-1-58567-598-2.
Wadey, Paul (January 8, 2004). "Jake Hess". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 13, 2010.
Warwick, Neil; Kutner, Jon; Brown, Tony (2004). The Complete Book of the British Charts: Singles & Albums (3rd ed.). Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-058-5.
Waters, Lindsay (Spring 2003). "Come Softly, Darling, Hear What I Say: Listening in a State of Distraction  A Tribute to the Work of Walter Benjamin, Elvis Presley, and Robert Christgau". Boundary 2. 30: 199 212. doi:10.1215/01903659-30-1-199. S2CID 161635612. Retrieved February 25, 2017.
Wertheimer, Neil (1997). Total Health for Men. Rodale Press.
Whitburn, Joel (1993). Billboard Top 1000 Singles 1955 1992. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-7935-2072-5.
Whitburn, Joel (2006). The Billboard Book of Top 40 Country Hits (2nd ed.). Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-8291-9.
Whitburn, Joel (2010). The Billboard Book of Top 40 Hits (9th ed.). Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-8554-5.
Williams, Todd (August 20, 2012). "Why I Stopped Hating Elvis Presley". Creative Loafing. Archived from the original on July 4, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2018.
Williamson, Joel (2014). Elvis Presley: A Southern Life. Oxford University Press.
Williamson, Joel (2015). Elvis Presley: A Southern Life. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-986317-4.
Wilson, Bee (2010). Sandwich: A Global History. Reaktion. ISBN 978-1-86189-771-8.
Wolfe, Charles (1994). Amazing Grace: His Greatest Sacred Performances. CD Booklet RCA/BMG. UPC 7863664212.
Woolley, John T.; Peters, Gerhard (August 17, 1977). "Jimmy Carter: Death of Elvis Presley Statement by the President". American Presidency Project. University of California, Santa Barbara. Retrieved May 15, 2021.
Further reading
Allen, Lew (2007). Elvis and the Birth of Rock. Genesis. ISBN 978-1-905662-00-5.
Bennet, Mark (August 15, 2017). "Elvis impersonator reviews his career highlights, wardrobe". Daily Herald of Arlington Heights. Retrieved February 2, 2018.
"Elvis Presley: Chart History  Classical Albums". Billboard. 2018. Archived from the original on May 7, 2018. Retrieved January 9, 2018.
Bloom, Nate (2010). "The Jews Who Wrote Christmas Songs". InterfaithFamily.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011.
Cantor, Louis (2005). Dewey and Elvis: The Life and Times of a Rock 'n' Roll Deejay. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02981-3.
"Elvis Presley Fast Facts". CNN. December 22, 2020 [May 12, 2017]. Retrieved June 14, 2022.
Dickerson, James L. (2001). Colonel Tom Parker: The Curious Life of Elvis Presley's Eccentric Manager. Cooper Square Press. ISBN 978-0-8154-1267-0.
Gatto, Kimberly; Racimo, Victoria (2017). All the King's Horses: the Equestrian Life of Elvis Presley. Regnery History. ISBN 978-1-62157-603-7.
Goldman, Albert (1981). Elvis. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-023657-8.
Goldman, Albert (1990). Elvis: The Last 24 Hours. St. Martin's. ISBN 978-0-312-92541-3.
Klein, George (2010). Elvis: My Best Man: Radio Days, Rock 'n' Roll Nights, and My Lifelong Friendship with Elvis Presley. Virgin Books. ISBN 978-0-307-45274-0
Marcus, Greil (1991). Dead Elvis: A Chronicle of a Cultural Obsession. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-41718-1.
Marcus, Greil (2000). Double Trouble: Bill Clinton and Elvis Presley in a Land of No Alternative. Picador. ISBN 978-0-571-20676-6.
Mawer, Sharon (2007a). "Album Chart History  1974". The Official UK Charts Company. Archived from the original on December 17, 2007. Retrieved February 1, 2010.
Mawer, Sharon (2007b). "Album Chart History  1977". The Official UK Charts Company. Archived from the original on April 15, 2008. Retrieved February 1, 2010.
Nash, Alanna (2010). Baby, Let's Play House: Elvis Presley and the Women Who Loved Him. It Books. ISBN 978-0-06-169984-9.
Roy, Samuel (1985). Elvis: Prophet of Power. Branden, ISBN 978-0-8283-1898-3.
"Southern Genealogy Yields Surprises". Voice of America. October 27, 2009. Retrieved January 19, 2018.
Whitburn, Joel (2007). Joel Whitburn Presents the Billboard Albums (6th ed.). Record Research. ISBN 978-0-89820-166-6.
Whitburn, Joel (2008). Joel Whitburn Presents Hot Country Albums: Billboard 1964 to 2007. Record Research. ISBN 978-0-89820-173-4.
Red West, Sonny West, and Dave Hebler as told to Steve Dunleavy (1977). Elvis: What Happened? Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-345-27215-7.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Elvis Presley.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Elvis Presley.
Elvis Presley at Curlie
Elvis Presley at IMDb
Elvis Presley at the TCM Movie Database
Elvis Presley at AllMovie
Elvis The Music official record label site
Elvis Presley Interviews on officially sanctioned Elvis Australia site
"The All American Boy: Enter Elvis and the Rock-a-billies" episode of 1968 Pop Chronicles radio series
vteElvis Presley
Albums
Singles
Songs
Films and television
Personal relationships
Cultural depictions
Cultural impact
Studio albums
Elvis Presley
Elvis (1956 album)
Elvis' Christmas Album
Elvis Is Back!
His Hand in Mine
Something for Everybody
Pot Luck
How Great Thou Art
From Elvis in Memphis
From Memphis to Vegas / From Vegas to Memphis
That's the Way It Is
Elvis Country (I'm 10,000 Years Old)
Love Letters from Elvis
Elvis Sings The Wonderful World of Christmas
Elvis Now
He Touched Me
Elvis (1973 album)
Raised on Rock / For Ol' Times Sake
Good Times
Promised Land
Today
From Elvis Presley Boulevard, Memphis, Tennessee
Moody Blue
Soundtrack albums
Loving You
King Creole
G.I. Blues
Blue Hawaii
Girls! Girls! Girls!
It Happened at the World's Fair
Fun in Acapulco
Kissin' Cousins
Roustabout
Girl Happy
Harum Scarum
Frankie and Johnny
Paradise Hawaiian Style
Spinout
Double Trouble
Clambake
Speedway
Viva Elvis
Elvis Presley: The Searcher
EPs
Love Me Tender
Peace in the Valley
Jailhouse Rock
Flaming Star
Follow That Dream
Kid Galahad
Viva Las Vegas
Tickle Me
Easy Come, Easy Go
Live albums
Elvis (1968 album)
From Memphis to Vegas / From Vegas to Memphis
On Stage
As Recorded at Madison Square Garden
Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite
Elvis Recorded Live on Stage in Memphis
Having Fun with Elvis on Stage
Elvis in Concert
An Afternoon in the Garden
Budget albums
Elvis Sings Flaming Star
Let's Be Friends
Almost in Love
C'mon Everybody
I Got Lucky
Elvis' 40 Greatest
Pure Gold
Compilation albums
Elvis' Golden Records
For LP Fans Only
A Date with Elvis
50,000,000 Elvis Fans Can't Be Wrong
Elvis' Golden Records Volume 3
Elvis for Everyone!
Elvis' Gold Records Volume 4
Elvis: A Legendary Performer Volume 1
Elvis: A Legendary Performer Volume 2
The Sun Sessions
Welcome to My World
Mahalo from Elvis
Elvis: A Legendary Performer Volume 3
Greatest Hits Volume 1
Elvis' Gold Records Volume 5
Amazing Grace: His Greatest Sacred Performances
Command Performances: The Essential 60s Masters II
Elvis 56
Tiger Man
Memories: The '68 Comeback Special
Sunrise
Suspicious Minds: The Memphis 1969 Anthology
The 50 Greatest Hits
ELV1S: 30 #1 Hits
2nd to None
Elvis at Sun
Hitstory
Elvis Inspirational
Elvis Rock
Elvis Christmas
The Essential Elvis Presley
Christmas Duets
If I Can Dream
Way Down in the Jungle Room
The Wonder of You
Where No One Stands Alone
Box sets
Worldwide 50 Gold Award Hits Vol. 1
The King of Rock 'n' Roll: The Complete 50's Masters
From Nashville to Memphis: The Essential '60s Masters
Walk a Mile in My Shoes: The Essential '70s Masters
Peace in the Valley: The Complete Gospel Recordings
Live in Las Vegas
Today, Tomorrow, and Forever
Elvis the King
The Complete '68 Comeback Special
The Complete Elvis Presley Masters
Biographical films
Elvis (1979 film)
Elvis (1990 series)
Elvis Meets Nixon
Elvis (2005 miniseries)
Elvis & Nixon
Elvis (2022 film)
Priscilla
Documentaries
The Pied Piper of Cleveland
Elvis: That's the Way It Is
Elvis on Tour
This Is Elvis
The New Gladiators
Elvis Presley: The Searcher
TV specials
The Frank Sinatra Timex Show: Welcome Home Elvis
Elvis ('68 Comeback Special)
Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite
Elvis in Concert
Stage shows
Cooking with Elvis
All Shook Up
Elvis. The Musical
Elvis: The Concert
Viva Elvis
The Elvis Dead
Related people
Lisa Marie Presley (daughter)
Priscilla Presley (ex-wife)
Brandon Presley (second cousin)
Sam Phillips
The Blue Moon Boys
The Jordanaires
The Imperials
The Sweet Inspirations
TCB Band
J. D. Sumner
Stephen H. Sholes
June Juanico
Memphis Mafia
Colonel Tom Parker
George C. Nichopoulos
Judy Spreckels
Linda Thompson
Ginger Alden
Larry Geller
Related articles
Graceland
Audubon Street House
Impersonators
Elvis and Gladys
Elvis and Me
Elvis: What Happened?
Elvis-A-Rama Museum
Sun recordings
Million Dollar Quartet
Cultural depictions of Elvis Presley
Songs about Elvis
Elvis Presley Enterprises
Elvis Presley Lake
"Elvis has left the building"
Elvis Radio
FBI files on Elvis Presley
Military service
Eight Elvises
Triple Elvis
Elvis Presley's Pink Cadillac
Elvis Presley's guitars
Elvis Presley Forever stamp
Elvis sightings
Elvis sandwich
Fool's Gold Loaf
Elvis' Greatest Shit
List of memorials
 Category
vteElvis Presley singles1954
"That's All Right" / "Blue Moon of Kentucky"
"Good Rockin' Tonight" / "I Don't Care if the Sun Don't Shine"
"Milkcow Blues Boogie" / "You're a Heartbreaker"
1955
"I'm Left, You're Right, She's Gone" / "Baby Let's Play House"
"I Forgot to Remember to Forget" / "Mystery Train"
1956
"Heartbreak Hotel" / "I Was the One"
"I Want You, I Need You, I Love You" / "My Baby Left Me"
"Don't Be Cruel" / "Hound Dog"
"Blue Suede Shoes" / "Tutti Frutti"
"Money Honey"
"I Got a Woman"
"Tryin' to Get to You"
"Blue Moon"
"I'll Never Let You Go (Little Darlin')" / "I'm Gonna Sit Right Down and Cry (Over You)"
"Shake, Rattle and Roll" / "Lawdy Miss Clawdy"
"Love Me Tender" / "Any Way You Want Me"
1957
"Too Much" / "Playing for Keeps"
"All Shook Up" / "That's When Your Heartaches Begin"
"Peace in the Valley"
"(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear" / "Loving You"
"Paralyzed" (UK)
"Jailhouse Rock" / "Treat Me Nice"
"Party" / "Got a Lot o' Livin' to Do!" (UK)
1958
"Don't" / "I Beg of You"
"Wear My Ring Around Your Neck" / "Doncha' Think It's Time"
"Hard Headed Woman" / "Don't Ask Me Why"
"King Creole" (UK)
"One Night" / "I Got Stung"
1959
"I Need Your Love Tonight" / "A Fool Such as I"
"A Big Hunk o' Love" / "My Wish Came True"
1960
"Stuck on You" / "Fame and Fortune"
"It's Now or Never" / "A Mess of Blues"
"Are You Lonesome Tonight?" / "I Gotta Know"
1961
"Surrender" / "Lonely Man"
"I Feel So Bad" / "Wild in the Country"
"(Marie's the Name) His Latest Flame" / "Little Sister"
"Can't Help Falling in Love" / "Rock-A-Hula Baby"
1962
"Good Luck Charm" / "Anything That's Part of You"
"She's Not You" / "Just Tell Her Jim Said Hello"
"King of the Whole Wide World"
"Return to Sender" / "Where Do You Come From"
1963
"One Broken Heart for Sale" / "They Remind Me Too Much of You"
"(You're the) Devil in Disguise"
"Bossa Nova Baby" / "Witchcraft"
1964
"Kissin' Cousins" / "It Hurts Me"
"Kiss Me Quick" / "Suspicion"
"Viva Las Vegas" / "What'd I Say"
"Such a Night" / "Never Ending"
"Ask Me" / "Ain't That Loving You Baby"
"Blue Christmas"
1965
"Do the Clam" / "You'll Be Gone"
"Crying in the Chapel
"(Such an) Easy Question" / "It Feels So Right"
"I'm Yours" / "(It's a) Long Lonely Highway"
"Puppet on a String" / "Wooden Heart"
1966
"Tell Me Why" / "Blue River"
"Frankie and Johnny" / "Please Don't Stop Loving Me"
"Love Letters"
"Spinout" / "All That I Am"
"If Every Day Was Like Christmas"
1967
"Indescribably Blue" / "Fools Fall in Love"
"You Gotta Stop" / "The Love Machine" (UK)
"Long Legged Girl (with the Short Dress On)" / "That's Someone You Never Forget"
"There's Always Me" / "Judy"
"Big Boss Man" / "You Don't Know Me"
1968
"Guitar Man"
"U.S. Male" / "Stay Away"
"We Call on Him" / "You'll Never Walk Alone"
"Your Time Hasn't Come Yet, Baby" / "Let Yourself Go"
"Almost in Love" / "A Little Less Conversation"
"If I Can Dream" / "Edge of Reality"
1969
"Memories" / "Charro"
"How Great Thou Art"
"In the Ghetto" / "Any Day Now"
"Clean Up Your Own Backyard"
"Suspicious Minds" / "You'll Think of Me"
"Don't Cry Daddy"
"Rubberneckin'"
1970
"Kentucky Rain"
"The Wonder of You" / "Mama Liked the Roses"
"I've Lost You" / "The Next Step Is Love"
"You Don't Have to Say You Love Me" / "Patch It Up"
"I Really Don't Want to Know" / "There Goes My Everything"
1971
"Rags to Riches"
"Life" / "Only Believe"
"I'm Leavin'"
"It's Only Love" / "The Sound of Your Cry"
"Merry Christmas Baby" / "O Come All Ye Faithful"
1972
"Until It's Time for You to Go" / "We Can Make the Morning"
"He Touched Me" / "Bosom of Abraham"
"An American Trilogy" / "The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face"
"Burning Love" / "It's a Matter of Time"
"Separate Ways" / "Always on My Mind"
1973
"Steamroller Blues" / "Fool"
"Raised on Rock" / "For Ol' Times Sake"
1974
"Take Good Care of Her" / "I've Got a Thing About You, Baby"
"If You Talk in Your Sleep" / "Help Me"
"Promised Land" / "It's Midnight"
1975
"My Boy" / "Thinking About You"
"T-R-O-U-B-L-E"
"Bringing It Back" / "Pieces of My Life"
1976
"For the Heart" / "Hurt"
"Moody Blue" / "She Thinks I Still Care"
1977
"Way Down" / "Pledging My Love"
"My Way" / "America the Beautiful"
1978
"Unchained Melody" / "Softly as I Leave You"
Posthumoussingles
"Puppet on a String" / "(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear" (1978)
"Are You Sincere" / "Solitaire"
"There's a Honky Tonk Angel (Who'll Take Me Back In)" / "I Got a Feelin' in My Body"
"Guitar Man"
"Loving Arms" / You Asked Me To"
"You'll Never Walk Alone / "There Goes My Everything" (1982)
"The Elvis Medley"
"I Was the One" / "Wear My Ring Around Your Neck" (1983)
"Heartbreak Hotel" (1996)
"Blue Christmas" (1998)
"A Little Less Conversation" (JXL remix)
"Rubberneckin'" (Paul Oakenfold Remix)
"I'll Be Home for Christmas" (with Carrie Underwood) (2008)
"Blue Christmas" (with Martina McBride) (2008)
"I Got a Feelin' in My Body" (Tommie Sunshine & Wuki Remix)
 Category
Awards for Elvis Presley
vteAmerican Music Award of Merit
Bing Crosby (1974)
Berry Gordy (1975)
Irving Berlin (1976)
Johnny Cash (1977)
Ella Fitzgerald (1978)
Perry Como (1979)
Benny Goodman (1980)
Chuck Berry (1981)
Stevie Wonder (1982)
Kenny Rogers (1983)
Michael Jackson (1984)
Loretta Lynn (1985)
Paul McCartney (1986)
Elvis Presley (1987)
The Beach Boys (1988)
Willie Nelson (1989)
Neil Diamond (1990)
Merle Haggard (1991)
James Brown (1992)
Bill Graham (1993)
Whitney Houston (1994)
Prince (1995)
Tammy Wynette (1996)
Little Richard (1997)
Frank Sinatra (1998)
Billy Joel (1999)
Gloria Estefan (2000)
Janet Jackson (2001)
Garth Brooks (2002)
Alabama (2003)
Bon Jovi (2004)
Annie Lennox (2008)
Sting (2016)
vteBest-selling singles by year in the United Kingdom1950s
1952: "Here in My Heart"   Al Martino
1953: "I Believe"   Frankie Laine
1954: "Secret Love"   Doris Day
1955: "Rose Marie"   Slim Whitman
1956: "I'll Be Home"   Pat Boone
1957: "Diana"   Paul Anka
1958: "Jailhouse Rock"   Elvis Presley
1959: "Living Doll"   Cliff Richard (UK)
1960s
1960: "It's Now or Never"   Elvis Presley
1961: "Wooden Heart"   Elvis Presley
1962: "I Remember You"   Frank Ifield (UK)
1963: "She Loves You"   The Beatles (UK)
1964: "Can't Buy Me Love"   The Beatles (UK)
1965: "Tears"   Ken Dodd (UK)
1966: "Green, Green Grass of Home"   Tom Jones (UK)
1967: "Release Me"   Engelbert Humperdinck (UK)
1968: "Hey Jude"   The Beatles (UK)
1969: "Sugar, Sugar"   The Archies
1970s
1970: "The Wonder of You"   Elvis Presley / "In the Summertime"   Mungo Jerry (UK)
1971: "My Sweet Lord"   George Harrison (UK)
1972: "Amazing Grace"   Royal Scots Dragoon Guards (UK)
1973: "Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree"   Dawn featuring Tony Orlando
1974: "Tiger Feet"   Mud (UK)
1975: "Bye Bye Baby"   Bay City Rollers (UK)
1976: "Save Your Kisses for Me"   Brotherhood of Man (UK)
1977: "Mull of Kintyre" / "Girls' School"   Wings (UK)
1978: "Rivers of Babylon" / "Brown Girl in the Ring"   Boney M.
1979: "Bright Eyes"   Art Garfunkel
1980s
1980: "Don't Stand So Close to Me"   The Police (UK)
1981: "Tainted Love"   Soft Cell (UK) / "Don't You Want Me"   The Human League (UK)
1982: "Come On Eileen"   Dexys Midnight Runners (UK)
1983: "Karma Chameleon"   Culture Club (UK)
1984: "Do They Know It's Christmas?"   Band Aid (UK)
1985: "The Power of Love"   Jennifer Rush
1986: "Don't Leave Me This Way"   The Communards (UK)
1987: "Never Gonna Give You Up"   Rick Astley (UK)
1988: "Mistletoe and Wine"   Cliff Richard (UK)
1989: "Ride on Time"   Black Box
1990s
1990: "Unchained Melody"   The Righteous Brothers
1991: "(Everything I Do) I Do It for You"   Bryan Adams
1992: "I Will Always Love You"   Whitney Houston
1993: "I'd Do Anything for Love (But I Won't Do That)"   Meat Loaf
1994: "Love Is All Around"   Wet Wet Wet (UK)
1995: "Unchained Melody"   Robson & Jerome (UK)
1996: "Killing Me Softly"   Fugees
1997: "Something About the Way You Look Tonight" / "Candle in the Wind 1997"   Elton John (UK)
1998: "Believe"   Cher
1999: "...Baby One More Time"   Britney Spears
2000s
2000: "Can We Fix It?"   Bob the Builder (UK)
2001: "It Wasn't Me"   Shaggy featuring Rikrok (UK)
2002: "Anything Is Possible" / "Evergreen"   Will Young (UK)
2003: "Where Is the Love?"   Black Eyed Peas
2004: "Do They Know It's Christmas?"   Band Aid 20 (UK)
2005: "(Is This the Way to) Amarillo"   Tony Christie featuring Peter Kay (UK)
2006: "Crazy"   Gnarls Barkley
2007: "Bleeding Love"   Leona Lewis (UK)
2008: "Hallelujah"   Alexandra Burke (UK)
2009: "Poker Face"   Lady Gaga
2010s
2010: "Love the Way You Lie"   Eminem featuring Rihanna
2011: "Someone like You"   Adele (UK)
2012: "Somebody That I Used to Know"   Gotye featuring Kimbra 
2013: "Blurred Lines"   Robin Thicke featuring T.I. & Pharrell Williams
2014: "Happy"   Pharrell Williams
2015: "Uptown Funk"   Mark Ronson (UK) featuring Bruno Mars
2016: "One Dance"   Drake featuring Wizkid and Kyla (UK)
2017: "Shape of You"   Ed Sheeran (UK)
2018: "One Kiss"   Calvin Harris and Dua Lipa (UK)
2019: "Someone You Loved"   Lewis Capaldi (UK)
2020s
2020: "Blinding Lights"   The Weeknd
2021: "Bad Habits"   Ed Sheeran (UK)
2022: "As It Was"   Harry Styles (UK)
vteCountry Music Hall of Fame 1990s
Tennessee Ernie Ford (1990)
Felice and Boudleaux Bryant (1991)
George Jones (1992)
Frances Preston (1992)
Willie Nelson (1993)
Merle Haggard (1994)
Roger Miller (1995)
Jo Walker-Meador (1995)
Patsy Montana (1996)
Buck Owens (1996)
Ray Price (1996)
Harlan Howard (1997)
Brenda Lee (1997)
Cindy Walker (1997)
George Morgan (1998)
Elvis Presley (1998)
E.W. "Bud" Wendell (1998)
Tammy Wynette (1998)
Johnny Bond (1999)
Dolly Parton (1999)
Conway Twitty (1999)
vteGrammy Lifetime Achievement Award1963 1990
1963
Bing Crosby
1965
Frank Sinatra
1966
Duke Ellington
1967
Ella Fitzgerald
1968
Irving Berlin
1971
Elvis Presley
1972
Louis Armstrong
Mahalia Jackson
1984
Chuck Berry
Charlie Parker
1985
Leonard Bernstein
1986
Benny Goodman
The Rolling Stones
Andr s Segovia
1987
Roy Acuff
Benny Carter
Enrico Caruso
Ray Charles
Fats Domino
Woody Herman
Billie Holiday
B.B. King
Isaac Stern
Igor Stravinsky
Arturo Toscanini
Hank Williams
1989
Fred Astaire
Pablo Casals
Dizzy Gillespie
Jascha Heifetz
Lena Horne
Leontyne Price
Bessie Smith
Art Tatum
Sarah Vaughan
1990
Nat King Cole
Miles Davis
Vladimir Horowitz
Paul McCartney
1991 2000
1991
Marian Anderson
Bob Dylan
John Lennon
Kitty Wells
1992
James Brown
John Coltrane
Jimi Hendrix
Muddy Waters
1993
Chet Atkins
Little Richard
Thelonious Monk
Bill Monroe
Pete Seeger
Fats Waller
1994
Bill Evans
Aretha Franklin
Arthur Rubinstein
1995
Patsy Cline
Peggy Lee
Henry Mancini
Curtis Mayfield
Barbra Streisand
1996
Dave Brubeck
Marvin Gaye
Georg Solti
Stevie Wonder
1997
Bobby "Blue" Bland
The Everly Brothers
Judy Garland
St phane Grappelli
Buddy Holly
Charles Mingus
Oscar Peterson
Frank Zappa
1998
Bo Diddley
The Mills Brothers
Roy Orbison
Paul Robeson
1999
Johnny Cash
Sam Cooke
Otis Redding
Smokey Robinson
Mel Torm 
2000
Harry Belafonte
Woody Guthrie
John Lee Hooker
Mitch Miller
Willie Nelson
2001 2010
2001
The Beach Boys
Tony Bennett
Sammy Davis Jr.
Bob Marley
The Who
2002
Count Basie
Rosemary Clooney
Perry Como
Al Green
Joni Mitchell
2003
Etta James
Johnny Mathis
Glenn Miller
Tito Puente
Simon & Garfunkel
2004
Van Cliburn
The Funk Brothers
Ella Jenkins
Sonny Rollins
Artie Shaw
Doc Watson
2005
Eddy Arnold
Art Blakey
The Carter Family
Morton Gould
Janis Joplin
Led Zeppelin
Jerry Lee Lewis
Jelly Roll Morton
Pinetop Perkins
The Staple Singers
2006
David Bowie
Cream
Merle Haggard
Robert Johnson
Jessye Norman
Richard Pryor
The Weavers
2007
Joan Baez
Booker T. & the M.G.'s
Maria Callas
Ornette Coleman
The Doors
The Grateful Dead
Bob Wills
2008
Burt Bacharach
The Band
Cab Calloway
Doris Day
Itzhak Perlman
Max Roach
Earl Scruggs
2009
Gene Autry
The Blind Boys of Alabama
The Four Tops
Hank Jones
Brenda Lee
Dean Martin
Tom Paxton
2010
Leonard Cohen
Bobby Darin
David "Honeyboy" Edwards
Michael Jackson
Loretta Lynn
Andr  Previn
Clark Terry
2011 2020
2011
Julie Andrews
Roy Haynes
Juilliard String Quartet
The Kingston Trio
Dolly Parton
Ramones
George Beverly Shea
2012
The Allman Brothers Band
Glen Campbell
Ant nio Carlos Jobim
George Jones
The Memphis Horns
Diana Ross
Gil Scott-Heron
2013
Glenn Gould
Charlie Haden
Lightnin' Hopkins
Carole King
Patti Page
Ravi Shankar
The Temptations
2014
The Beatles
Clifton Chenier
The Isley Brothers
Kraftwerk
Kris Kristofferson
Armando Manzanero
Maud Powell
2015
Bee Gees
Pierre Boulez
Buddy Guy
George Harrison
Flaco Jim nez
The Louvin Brothers
Wayne Shorter
2016
Ruth Brown
Celia Cruz
Earth, Wind & Fire
Herbie Hancock
Jefferson Airplane
Linda Ronstadt
Run-DMC
2017
Shirley Caesar
Ahmad Jamal
Charley Pride
Jimmie Rodgers
Nina Simone
Sly Stone
The Velvet Underground
2018
Hal Blaine
Neil Diamond
Emmylou Harris
Louis Jordan
The Meters
Queen
Tina Turner
2019
Black Sabbath
George Clinton and Parliament-Funkadelic
Billy Eckstine
Donny Hathaway
Julio Iglesias
Sam & Dave
Dionne Warwick
2020
Chicago
Roberta Flack
Isaac Hayes
Iggy Pop
John Prine
Public Enemy
Sister Rosetta Tharpe
2021 present
2021
Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five
Lionel Hampton
Marilyn Horne
Salt-N-Pepa
Selena
Talking Heads
2022
Bonnie Raitt
2023
Bobby McFerrin
Nirvana
Ma Rainey
Slick Rick
Nile Rodgers
The Supremes
Ann Wilson and Nancy Wilson
vteRock and Roll Hall of Fame   Class of 1986Performers
Chuck Berry
James Brown
Ray Charles
Sam Cooke
Fats Domino
The Everly Brothers
Don Everly, Phil Everly
Buddy Holly
Jerry Lee Lewis
Little Richard
Elvis Presley
Early influences
Robert Johnson
Jimmie Rodgers
Jimmy Yancey
Non-performers(Ahmet Ertegun Award)
Alan Freed
Sam Phillips
Lifetime achievement
John Hammond
Portals: 1950s Biography Film Mississippi Pop music Rock music Rhythm and blues Television Tennessee
Authority control International
FAST
2
ISNI
2
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
Finland
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Academics
CiNii
Artists
Grammy Awards
MusicBrainz
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
NARA
RISM
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elvis_Presley&oldid=1149659386"