Island in the North Atlantic Ocean
This article is about the island. For the sovereign state, see Republic of Ireland. For the part of the United Kingdom, see Northern Ireland. For other uses, see Ireland (disambiguation).
Ireland ire (Irish)Airlann (Ulster Scots)Satellite image, October 2010Location of Ireland (dark green)in Europe (dark grey)GeographyLocationNorthwestern EuropeCoordinates53 25 N 8 0 W  /  53.417 N 8.000 W  / 53.417; -8.000Coordinates: 53 25 N 8 0 W  /  53.417 N 8.000 W  / 53.417; -8.000Adjacent toAtlantic OceanArea84,421 km2 (32,595 sq mi)[1]Area rank20th[2]Coastline7,527 km (4677.1 mi)[3][4]Highest elevation1,041 m (3415 ft)Highest pointCarrauntoohilAdministrationRepublic of IrelandLargest cityDublin (pop. 1,173,179)United KingdomCountryNorthern IrelandLargest cityBelfast (pop. 343,542)DemographicsDemonymIrishPopulation7,026,636 (2022)[a][5]Population rank19thPop. density82.2/km2 (212.9/sq mi)Languages
English
Irish
ISL
Ulster Scots
NISL
Shelta
Ethnic groups96.4% White1.7% Asian1.1% Black0.8% Other[6][7]Additional informationTime zoneGreenwich Mean Time (UTC) Summer (DST)Irish Standard Time / British Summer Time (UTC+1)Patron saintsSaint PatrickSaint BrigidSaint Colmcille
^  Including surrounding islands.
Ireland (/ a rl nd/ (listen) YRE-l nd; Irish:  ire [ e ] (listen); Ulster-Scots: Airlann [ rl n]) is an island in the North Atlantic Ocean, in north-western Europe. It is separated from Great Britain to its east by the North Channel, the Irish Sea, and St George's Channel. Ireland is the second-largest island of the British Isles, the third-largest in Europe, and the twentieth-largest in the world.[8]
Geopolitically, Ireland is divided between the Republic of Ireland (officially named Ireland), an independent state covering five-sixths of the island, and Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. As of 2022, the population of the entire island is just over 7 million, with 5.1 million living in the Republic of Ireland and 1.9 million in Northern Ireland, ranking it the second-most populous island in Europe after Great Britain.[5]
The geography of Ireland comprises relatively low-lying mountains surrounding a central plain, with several navigable rivers extending inland. Its lush vegetation is a product of its mild but changeable climate which is free of extremes in temperature. Much of Ireland was woodland until the end of the Middle Ages. Today, woodland makes up about 10% of the island, compared with a European average of over 33%,[9] with most of it being non-native conifer plantations.[10][11] The Irish climate is influenced by the Atlantic Ocean and thus very moderate,[12] and winters are milder than expected for such a northerly area, although summers are cooler than those in continental Europe. Rainfall and cloud cover are abundant.
Gaelic Ireland had emerged by the 1st century AD. The island was Christianised from the 5th century onwards. Following the 12th century Anglo-Norman invasion, England claimed sovereignty. However, English rule did not extend over the whole island until the 16th 17th century Tudor conquest, which led to colonisation by settlers from Britain. In the 1690s, a system of Protestant English rule was designed to materially disadvantage the Catholic majority and Protestant dissenters, and was extended during the 18th century. With the Acts of Union in 1801, Ireland became a part of the United Kingdom. A war of independence in the early 20th century was followed by the partition of the island, leading to the creation of the Irish Free State, which became increasingly sovereign over the following decades, and Northern Ireland, which remained a part of the United Kingdom. Northern Ireland saw much civil unrest from the late 1960s until the 1990s. This subsided following the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. In 1973, the Republic of Ireland joined the European Economic Community while the United Kingdom, and Northern Ireland as part of it, did the same. In 2020, the United Kingdom, Northern Ireland included, left what was by then the European Union (EU).
Irish culture has had a significant influence on other cultures, especially in the field of literature. Alongside mainstream Western culture, a strong indigenous culture exists, as expressed through Gaelic games, Irish music, Irish language, and Irish dance. The island's culture shares many features with that of Great Britain, including the English language, and sports such as association football, rugby, horse racing, golf, and boxing.
Etymology
The names Ireland and  ire derive from Old Irish  riu, a goddess in Irish mythology first recorded in the ninth century. The etymology of  riu is disputed but may derive from the Proto-Indo-European root *h2uer, referring to flowing water.[13]
History
Main article: History of Ireland
Prehistoric Ireland
Main article: Prehistoric Ireland
During the last glacial period, and until about 16,000 BC, much of Ireland was periodically covered in ice.[14] The relative sea level was less than 50m lower resulting in an ice bridge (but not a land bridge) forming between Ireland and Great Britain.[15] By 14,000 BC this ice bridge existed only between Northern Ireland and Scotland and by 12,000 BC Ireland was completely separated from Great Britain.[16] Later, around 6100 BC, Great Britain became separated from continental Europe.[17] Until recently, the earliest evidence of human activity in Ireland was dated at 12,500 years ago, demonstrated by a butchered bear bone found in a cave in County Clare.[18] Since 2021, the earliest evidence of human activity in Ireland is dated to 33,000 years ago.[19]
By about 8000 BC, more sustained occupation of the island has been shown, with evidence for Mesolithic communities around the island.[20]
Some time before 4000 BC, Neolithic settlers introduced cereal cultivars, domesticated animals such as cattle and sheep, built large timber buildings, and stone monuments.[21][14] The earliest evidence for farming in Ireland or Great Britain is from Ferriter's Cove, County Kerry, where a flint knife, cattle bones and a sheep's tooth were carbon-dated to c. 4350 BC.[22] Field systems were developed in different parts of Ireland, including at the C ide Fields, that has been preserved beneath a blanket of peat in present-day Tyrawley. An extensive field system, arguably the oldest in the world,[23] consisted of small divisions separated by dry-stone walls. The fields were farmed for several centuries between 3500 BC and 3000 BC. Wheat and barley were the principal crops.[14]
The Bronze Age began around 2500 BC, with technology changing people's everyday lives during this period through innovations such as the wheel; harnessing oxen; weaving textiles; brewing alcohol; and skillful metalworking,[14] which produced new weapons and tools, along with fine gold decoration and jewellery, such as brooches and torcs.
Emergence of Celtic Ireland
How and when the island became Celtic has been debated for close to a century, with the migrations of the Celts being one of the more enduring themes of archaeological and linguistic studies. The most recent genetic research strongly associates the spread of Indo-European languages (including Celtic) through Western Europe with a people bringing a composite Beaker culture, with its arrival in Britain and Ireland dated to around the middle of the third millennium BC.[24] According to John T. Koch and others, Ireland in the Late Bronze Age was part of a maritime trading-network culture called the Atlantic Bronze Age that also included Britain, western France and Iberia, and that this is where Celtic languages developed.[25][26][27][28] This contrasts with the traditional view that their origin lies in mainland Europe with the Hallstatt culture.[29]
 The Uragh Stone Circle, a Neolithic stone circle in Tuosist, close to Gleninchaquin Park, County Kerry
The long-standing traditional view is that the Celtic language, Ogham script and culture were brought to Ireland by waves of invading or migrating Celts from mainland Europe. This theory draws on the Lebor Gab la  renn, a medieval Christian pseudo-history of Ireland, along with the presence of Celtic culture, language and artefacts found in Ireland such as Celtic bronze spears, shields, torcs and other finely crafted Celtic associated possessions. The theory holds that there were four separate Celtic invasions of Ireland. The Priteni were said to be the first, followed by the Belgae from northern Gaul and Britain. Later, Laighin tribes from Armorica (present-day Brittany) were said to have invaded Ireland and Britain more or less simultaneously. Lastly, the Milesians (Gaels) were said to have reached Ireland from either northern Iberia or southern Gaul.[30] It was claimed that a second wave named the Euerni, belonging to the Belgae people of northern Gaul, began arriving about the sixth century BC. They were said to have given their name to the island.[31][32]
The theory was advanced in part because of the lack of archaeological evidence for large-scale Celtic immigration, though it is accepted that such movements are notoriously difficult to identify. Historical linguists are skeptical that this method alone could account for the absorption of Celtic language, with some saying that an assumed processual view of Celtic linguistic formation is 'an especially hazardous exercise'.[33][34] Genetic lineage investigation into the area of Celtic migration to Ireland has led to findings that showed no significant differences in mitochondrial DNA between Ireland and large areas of continental Europe, in contrast to parts of the Y-chromosome pattern. When taking both into account, a study concluded that modern Celtic speakers in Ireland could be thought of as European "Atlantic Celts" showing a shared ancestry throughout the Atlantic zone from northern Iberia to western Scandinavia rather than substantially central European.[35]
 Stone tools found in Ireland. Photograph taken in the National Museum of Ireland, Dublin.
In 2012, research showed that the occurrence of genetic markers for the earliest farmers was almost eliminated by Beaker-culture immigrants: they carried what was then a new Y-chromosome R1b marker, believed to have originated in Iberia about 2500 BC. The prevalence amongst modern Irish men of this mutation is a remarkable 84%, the highest in the world, and closely matched in other populations along the Atlantic fringes down to Spain. A similar genetic replacement happened with lineages in mitochondrial DNA.[22][36] This conclusion is supported by recent research carried out by the geneticist David Reich, who says: "British and Irish skeletons from the Bronze Age that followed the Beaker period had at most 10 per cent ancestry from the first farmers of these islands, with other 90 per cent from people like those associated with the Bell Beaker culture in the Netherlands." He suggests that it was Beaker users who introduced an Indo-European language, represented here by Celtic (i.e. a new language and culture introduced directly by migration and genetic replacement).[24]
Late antiquity and early medieval times
Main article: History of Ireland (800 1169)
 The Scoti were Gaelic-speaking people from Ireland who settled in western Scotland in the 6th century or before.
The earliest written records of Ireland come from classical Greco-Roman geographers. Ptolemy in his Almagest refers to Ireland as Mikra Brettania ("Little Britain"), in contrast to the larger island, which he called Megale Brettania ("Great Britain").[37] In his later work, Geography, Ptolemy refers to Ireland as Iouernia and to Great Britain as Albion. These 'new' names were likely to have been the local names for the islands at the time. The earlier names, in contrast, were likely to have been coined before direct contact with local peoples was made.[38]
The Romans referred to Ireland by this name too in its Latinised form, Hibernia, or Scotia.[39][40] Ptolemy records sixteen nations inhabiting every part of Ireland in 100 AD.[41] The relationship between the Roman Empire and the kingdoms of ancient Ireland is unclear. However, a number of finds of Roman coins have been made, for example at the Iron Age settlement of Freestone Hill near Gowran and Newgrange.[42]
Ireland continued as a patchwork of rival kingdoms; however, beginning in the 7th century, a concept of national kingship gradually became articulated through the concept of a High King of Ireland. Medieval Irish literature portrays an almost unbroken sequence of high kings stretching back thousands of years, but modern historians believe the scheme was constructed in the 8th century to justify the status of powerful political groupings by projecting the origins of their rule into the remote past.[43]
All of the Irish kingdoms had their own kings but were nominally subject to the high king. The high king was drawn from the ranks of the provincial kings and ruled also the royal kingdom of Meath, with a ceremonial capital at the Hill of Tara. The concept did not become a political reality until the Viking Age and even then was not a consistent one.[44] Ireland did have a culturally unifying rule of law: the early written judicial system, the Brehon Laws, administered by a professional class of jurists known as the brehons.[45]
The Chronicle of Ireland records that in 431, Bishop Palladius arrived in Ireland on a mission from Pope Celestine I to minister to the Irish "already believing in Christ".[46] The same chronicle records that Saint Patrick, Ireland's best known patron saint, arrived the following year. There is continued debate over the missions of Palladius and Patrick, but the consensus is that they both took place[47] and that the older druid tradition collapsed in the face of the new religion.[48] Irish Christian scholars excelled in the study of Latin and Greek learning and Christian theology. In the monastic culture that followed the Christianisation of Ireland, Latin and Greek learning was preserved in Ireland during the Early Middle Ages in contrast to elsewhere in Western Europe, where the Dark Ages followed the Fall of the Western Roman Empire.[48][49][page needed]
 A folio of the Book of Kells showing Christ enthroned
The arts of manuscript illumination, metalworking and sculpture flourished and produced treasures such as the Book of Kells, ornate jewellery and the many carved stone crosses[50] that still dot the island today. A mission founded in 563 on Iona by the Irish monk Saint Columba began a tradition of Irish missionary work that spread Celtic Christianity and learning to Scotland, England and the Frankish Empire on continental Europe after the fall of Rome.[51] These missions continued until the late Middle Ages, establishing monasteries and centres of learning, producing scholars such as Sedulius Scottus and Johannes Eriugena and exerting much influence in Europe.[citation needed]
From the 9th century, waves of Viking raiders plundered Irish monasteries and towns.[52] These raids added to a pattern of raiding and endemic warfare that was already deep-seated in Ireland. The Vikings were involved in establishing most of the major coastal settlements in Ireland: Dublin, Limerick, Cork, Wexford, Waterford, as well as other smaller settlements.[53][unreliable source?]
Norman and English invasions
Main articles: Norman invasion of Ireland, History of Ireland (1169 1536), and Tudor conquest of Ireland
See also: Bruce campaign in Ireland
 Remains of the 12th-century Trim Castle in County Meath, the largest Norman castle in Ireland
On 1 May 1169, an expedition of Cambro-Norman knights, with an army of about 600 men, landed at Bannow Strand in present-day County Wexford. It was led by Richard de Clare, known as 'Strongbow' owing to his prowess as an archer.[54] The invasion, which coincided with a period of renewed Norman expansion, was at the invitation of Dermot Mac Murrough, King of Leinster.[55]
In 1166, Mac Murrough had fled to Anjou, France, following a war involving Tighearn n Ua Ruairc, of Breifne, and sought the assistance of the Angevin King Henry II, in recapturing his kingdom. In 1171, Henry arrived in Ireland in order to review the general progress of the expedition. He wanted to re-exert royal authority over the invasion which was expanding beyond his control. Henry successfully re-imposed his authority over Strongbow and the Cambro-Norman warlords and persuaded many of the Irish kings to accept him as their overlord, an arrangement confirmed in the 1175 Treaty of Windsor.
The invasion was legitimised by reference to provisions of the alleged Papal Bull Laudabiliter, issued by an Englishman, Adrian IV, in 1155. The document apparently encouraged Henry to take control in Ireland in order to oversee the financial and administrative reorganisation of the Irish Church and its integration into the Roman Church system.[56] Some restructuring had already begun at the ecclesiastical level following the Synod of Kells in 1152.[57] There has been significant controversy regarding the authenticity of Laudabiliter,[58] and there is no general agreement as to whether the bull was genuine or a forgery.[59][60] Further, it had no standing in the Irish legal system.
 Political boundaries in Ireland in 1450, before the plantations
In 1172, Pope Alexander III further encouraged Henry to advance the integration of the Irish Church with Rome. Henry was authorised to impose a tithe of one penny per hearth as an annual contribution. This church levy called Peter's Pence, is extant in Ireland as a voluntary donation. In turn, Henry assumed the title of Lord of Ireland which Henry conferred on his younger son, John Lackland, in 1185. This defined the Anglo-Norman administration in Ireland as the Lordship of Ireland.[citation needed] When Henry's successor died unexpectedly in 1199, John inherited the crown of England and retained the Lordship of Ireland. Over the century that followed, Norman feudal law gradually replaced the Gaelic Brehon Law across large areas, so that by the late 13th century the Norman-Irish had established a feudal system throughout much of Ireland. Norman settlements were characterised by the establishment of baronies, manors, towns and the seeds of the modern county system. A version of the Magna Carta (the Great Charter of Ireland), substituting Dublin for London and the Irish Church for, the English church at the time, the Catholic Church, was published in 1216 and the Parliament of Ireland was founded in 1297.
Gaelicisation
From the mid-14th century, after the Black Death, Norman settlements in Ireland went into a period of decline. The Norman rulers and the Gaelic Irish elites intermarried and the areas under Norman rule became Gaelicised. In some parts, a hybrid Hiberno-Norman culture emerged. In response, the Irish parliament passed the Statutes of Kilkenny in 1367. These were a set of laws designed to prevent the assimilation of the Normans into Irish society by requiring English subjects in Ireland to speak English, follow English customs and abide by English law.[61]
By the end of the 15th century, central English authority in Ireland had all but disappeared, and a renewed Irish culture and language, albeit with Norman influences, was dominant again. English Crown control remained relatively unshaken in an amorphous foothold around Dublin known as The Pale, and under the provisions of Poynings' Law of 1494, Irish Parliamentary legislation was subject to the approval of the English Privy Council.[62]
The Kingdom of Ireland
Main article: Kingdom of Ireland
 A 16th century perception of Irish women and girls, illustrated in the manuscript "Th tre de tous les peuples et nations de la terre avec leurs habits et ornemens divers, tant anciens que modernes, diligemment depeints au naturel". Painted by Lucas d'Heere in the 2nd half of the 16th century. Preserved in the Ghent University Library.[63]
The title of King of Ireland was re-created in 1542 by Henry VIII, the then King of England, of the Tudor dynasty. English rule was reinforced and expanded in Ireland during the latter part of the 16th century, leading to the Tudor conquest of Ireland. A near-complete conquest was achieved by the turn of the 17th century, following the Nine Years' War and the Flight of the Earls.
This control was consolidated during the wars and conflicts of the 17th century, including the English and Scottish colonisation in the Plantations of Ireland, the Wars of the Three Kingdoms and the Williamite War. Irish losses during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms (which, in Ireland, included the Irish Confederacy and the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland) are estimated to include 20,000 battlefield casualties. 200,000 civilians are estimated to have died as a result of a combination of war-related famine, displacement, guerrilla activity and pestilence throughout the war. A further 50,000[Note 1] were sent into indentured servitude in the West Indies. Physician-general William Petty estimated that 504,000 Catholic Irish and 112,000 Protestant settlers died, and 100,000 people were transported, as a result of the war.[66] If a prewar population of 1.5 million is assumed, this would mean that the population was reduced by almost half.
The religious struggles of the 17th century left a deep sectarian division in Ireland. Religious allegiance now determined the perception in law of loyalty to the Irish King and Parliament. After the passing of the Test Act 1672, and the victory of the forces of the dual monarchy of William and Mary over the Jacobites, Roman Catholics and nonconforming Protestant Dissenters were barred from sitting as members in the Irish Parliament. Under the emerging Penal Laws, Irish Roman Catholics and Dissenters were increasingly deprived of various civil rights, even the ownership of hereditary property. Additional regressive punitive legislation followed in 1703, 1709 and 1728. This completed a comprehensive systemic effort to materially disadvantage Roman Catholics and Protestant Dissenters while enriching a new ruling class of Anglican conformists.[67] The new Anglo-Irish ruling class became known as the Protestant Ascendancy.
 Half-hanging of suspected United Irishmen
The "Great Frost" struck Ireland and the rest of Europe between December 1739 and September 1741, after a decade of relatively mild winters. The winters destroyed stored crops of potatoes and other staples, and the poor summers severely damaged harvests.[68][page needed] This resulted in the famine of 1740. An estimated 250,000 people (about one in eight of the population) died from the ensuing pestilence and disease.[69] The Irish government halted export of corn and kept the army in quarters but did little more.[69][70] Local gentry and charitable organisations provided relief but could do little to prevent the ensuing mortality.[69][70]
In the aftermath of the famine, an increase in industrial production and a surge in trade brought a succession of construction booms. The population soared in the latter part of this century and the architectural legacy of Georgian Ireland was built. In 1782, Poynings' Law was repealed, giving Ireland legislative independence from Great Britain for the first time since 1495. The British government, however, still retained the right to nominate the government of Ireland without the consent of the Irish parliament.
Union with Great Britain
Main article: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
In 1798, members of the Protestant Dissenter tradition (mainly Presbyterian) made common cause with Roman Catholics in a republican rebellion inspired and led by the Society of United Irishmen, with the aim of creating an independent Ireland. Despite assistance from France the rebellion was put down by British and Irish government and yeomanry forces. In 1800, the British and Irish parliaments both passed Acts of Union that, with effect from 1 January 1801, merged the Kingdom of Ireland and the Kingdom of Great Britain to create a United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.[71]
The passage of the Act in the Irish Parliament was ultimately achieved with substantial majorities, having failed on the first attempt in 1799. According to contemporary documents and historical analysis, this was achieved through a considerable degree of bribery, with funding provided by the British Secret Service Office, and the awarding of peerages, places and honours to secure votes.[71] Thus, the parliament in Ireland was abolished and replaced by a united parliament at Westminster in London, though resistance remained, as evidenced by Robert Emmet's failed Irish Rebellion of 1803.
Aside from the development of the linen industry, Ireland was largely passed over by the industrial revolution, partly because it lacked coal and iron resources[72][73] and partly because of the impact of the sudden union with the structurally superior economy of England,[74] which saw Ireland as a source of agricultural produce and capital.[75][76]
 A depiction of the Great Famine from Our Boys in Ireland by Henry Willard French (1891)
The Great Famine of 1845 1851 devastated Ireland, as in those years Ireland's population fell by one-third. More than one million people died from starvation and disease, with an additional million people emigrating during the famine, mostly to the United States and Canada.[77] In the century that followed, an economic depression caused by the famine resulted in a further million people emigrating.[78] By the end of the decade, half of all immigration to the United States was from Ireland. The period of civil unrest that followed until the end of the 19th century is referred to as the Land War. Mass emigration became deeply entrenched and the population continued to decline until the mid-20th century. Immediately prior to the famine the population was recorded as 8.2 million by the 1841 census.[79] The population has never returned to this level since.[80] The population continued to fall until 1961; County Leitrim was the final Irish county to record a population increase post-famine, in 2006.
The 19th and early 20th centuries saw the rise of modern Irish nationalism, primarily among the Roman Catholic population. The pre-eminent Irish political figure after the Union was Daniel O'Connell. He was elected as Member of Parliament for Ennis in a surprise result and despite being unable to take his seat as a Roman Catholic. O'Connell spearheaded a vigorous campaign that was taken up by the Prime Minister, the Irish-born soldier and statesman, the Duke of Wellington. Steering the Catholic Relief Bill through Parliament, aided by future prime minister Robert Peel, Wellington prevailed upon a reluctant George IV to sign the Bill and proclaim it into law. George's father had opposed the plan of the earlier Prime Minister, Pitt the Younger, to introduce such a bill following the Union of 1801, fearing Catholic Emancipation to be in conflict with the Act of Settlement 1701.
Daniel O'Connell led a subsequent campaign, for the repeal of the Act of Union, which failed. Later in the century, Charles Stewart Parnell and others campaigned for autonomy within the Union, or "Home Rule". Unionists, especially those located in Ulster, were strongly opposed to Home Rule, which they thought would be dominated by Catholic interests.[81] After several attempts to pass a Home Rule bill through parliament, it looked certain that one would finally pass in 1914. To prevent this from happening, the Ulster Volunteers were formed in 1913 under the leadership of Edward Carson.[82]
Their formation was followed in 1914 by the establishment of the Irish Volunteers, whose aim was to ensure that the Home Rule Bill was passed. The Act was passed but with the "temporary" exclusion of the six counties of Ulster, which later became Northern Ireland. Before it could be implemented, however, the Act was suspended for the duration of the First World War. The Irish Volunteers split into two groups. The majority, approximately 175,000 in number, under John Redmond, took the name National Volunteers and supported Irish involvement in the war. A minority, approximately 13,000, retained the Irish Volunteers' name and opposed Ireland's involvement in the war.[82]
 Sackville Street (now O'Connell Street), Dublin, after the 1916 Easter Rising
The Easter Rising of 1916 was carried out by the latter group together with a smaller socialist militia, the Irish Citizen Army. The British response, executing fifteen leaders of the Rising over a period of ten days and imprisoning or interning more than a thousand people, turned the mood of the country in favour of the rebels. Support for Irish republicanism increased further due to the ongoing war in Europe, as well as the Conscription Crisis of 1918.[83]
The pro-independence republican party, Sinn F in, received overwhelming endorsement in the general election of 1918, and in 1919 proclaimed an Irish Republic, setting up its own parliament (D il  ireann) and government. Simultaneously the Volunteers, which became known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA), launched a three-year guerrilla war, which ended in a truce in July 1921 (although violence continued until June 1922, mostly in Northern Ireland).[83]
Partition
Main article: Partition of Ireland
In December 1921, the Anglo-Irish Treaty was concluded between the British government and representatives of the Second D il. It gave Ireland complete independence in its home affairs and practical independence for foreign policy, but an opt-out clause allowed Northern Ireland to remain within the United Kingdom, which it immediately exercised. Additionally, Members of the Free State Parliament were required to swear an oath of allegiance to the Constitution of the Irish Free State and make a statement of faithfulness to the king.[84] Disagreements over these provisions led to a split in the nationalist movement and a subsequent Irish Civil War between the new government of the Irish Free State and those opposed to the treaty, led by  amon de Valera. The civil war officially ended in May 1923 when de Valera issued a cease-fire order.[85]
Independence
Main articles: History of the Republic of Ireland and Economy of the Republic of Ireland
 Annotated page from the Anglo-Irish Treaty that established the Irish Free State and independence for 26 out of 32 Irish counties
During its first decade, the newly formed Irish Free State was governed by the victors of the civil war. When de Valera achieved power, he took advantage of the Statute of Westminster and political circumstances to build upon inroads to greater sovereignty made by the previous government. The oath was abolished and in 1937 a new constitution was adopted.[83] This completed a process of gradual separation from the British Empire that governments had pursued since independence. However, it was not until 1949 that the state was declared, officially, to be the Republic of Ireland.
The state was neutral during World War II, but offered clandestine assistance to the Allies, particularly in the potential defence of Northern Ireland. Despite their country's neutrality, approximately 50,000[86] volunteers from independent Ireland joined the British forces during the war, four being awarded Victoria Crosses.
The German intelligence was also active in Ireland.[87] Its operations ended in September 1941 when police made arrests based on surveillance carried out on the key diplomatic legations in Dublin. To the authorities, counterintelligence was a fundamental line of defence. With a regular army of only slightly over seven thousand men at the start of the war, and with limited supplies of modern weapons, the state would have had great difficulty in defending itself from invasion from either side in the conflict.[87][88]
Large-scale emigration marked most of the post-WWII period (particularly during the 1950s and 1980s), but beginning in 1987 the economy improved, and the 1990s saw the beginning of substantial economic growth. This period of growth became known as the Celtic Tiger.[89] The Republic's real GDP grew by an average of 9.6% per annum between 1995 and 1999,[90] in which year the Republic joined the euro. In 2000, it was the sixth-richest country in the world in terms of GDP per capita.[91] Historian R. F. Foster argues the cause was a combination of a new sense of initiative and the entry of American corporations. He concludes the chief factors were low taxation, pro-business regulatory policies, and a young, tech-savvy workforce. For many multinationals, the decision to do business in Ireland was made easier still by generous incentives from the Industrial Development Authority. In addition European Union membership was helpful, giving the country lucrative access to markets that it had previously reached only through the United Kingdom, and pumping huge subsidies and investment capital into the Irish economy.[92]
Modernisation brought secularisation in its wake. The traditionally high levels of religiosity have sharply declined. Foster points to three factors: First, Irish feminism, largely imported from America with liberal stances on contraception, abortion and divorce, undermined the authority of bishops and priests. Second, the mishandling of the paedophile scandals humiliated the Church, whose bishops seemed less concerned with the victims and more concerned with covering up for errant priests. Third, prosperity brought hedonism and materialism that undercut the ideals of saintly poverty.[93]
The financial crisis that began in 2008 dramatically ended this period of boom. GDP fell by 3% in 2008 and by 7.1% in 2009, the worst year since records began (although earnings by foreign-owned businesses continued to grow).[94] The state has since experienced deep recession, with unemployment, which doubled during 2009, remaining above 14% in 2012.[95]
Northern Ireland
Main articles: History of Northern Ireland and Economy of Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland resulted from the division of the United Kingdom by the Government of Ireland Act 1920, and until 1972 was a self-governing jurisdiction within the United Kingdom with its own parliament and prime minister. Northern Ireland, as part of the United Kingdom, was not neutral during the Second World War, and Belfast suffered four bombing raids in 1941. Conscription was not extended to Northern Ireland, and roughly an equal number volunteered from Northern Ireland as volunteered from the Republic of Ireland.
 Edward Carson signing the Solemn League and Covenant in 1912, declaring opposition to Home Rule "using all means which may be found necessary"
Although Northern Ireland was largely spared the strife of the civil war, in the decades that followed partition there were sporadic episodes of inter-communal violence. Nationalists, mainly Roman Catholic, wanted to unite Ireland as an independent republic, whereas unionists, mainly Protestant, wanted Northern Ireland to remain in the United Kingdom. The Protestant and Catholic communities in Northern Ireland voted largely along sectarian lines, meaning that the government of Northern Ireland (elected by "first-past-the-post" from 1929) was controlled by the Ulster Unionist Party. Over time, the minority Catholic community felt increasingly alienated with further disaffection fuelled by practices such as gerrymandering and discrimination in housing and employment.[96][97][98]
In the late 1960s, nationalist grievances were aired publicly in mass civil rights protests, which were often confronted by loyalist counter-protests.[99] The government's reaction to confrontations was seen to be one-sided and heavy-handed in favour of unionists. Law and order broke down as unrest and inter-communal violence increased.[100] The Northern Ireland government requested the British Army to aid the police and protect the Irish Nationalist population. In 1969, the paramilitary Provisional IRA, which favoured the creation of a united Ireland, emerged from a split in the Irish Republican Army and began a campaign against what it called the "British occupation of the six counties".[citation needed]
Other groups, both the unionist and nationalist participated in violence, and a period known as "the Troubles" began. Over 3,600 deaths resulted over the subsequent three decades of conflict.[101] Owing to the civil unrest during the Troubles, the British government suspended home rule in 1972 and imposed direct rule. There were several unsuccessful attempts to end the Troubles politically, such as the Sunningdale Agreement of 1973. In 1998, following a ceasefire by the Provisional IRA and multi-party talks, the Good Friday Agreement was concluded as a treaty between the British and Irish governments, annexing the text agreed in the multi-party talks.
The substance of the Agreement (formally referred to as the Belfast Agreement) was later endorsed by referendums in both parts of Ireland. The Agreement restored self-government to Northern Ireland on the basis of power-sharing in a regional Executive drawn from the major parties in a new Northern Ireland Assembly, with entrenched protections for the two main communities. The Executive is jointly headed by a First Minister and deputy First Minister drawn from the unionist and nationalist parties. Violence had decreased greatly after the Provisional IRA and loyalist ceasefires in 1994 and in 2005 the Provisional IRA announced the end of its armed campaign and an independent commission supervised its disarmament and that of other nationalist and unionist paramilitary organisations.[102]
The Assembly and power-sharing Executive were suspended several times but were restored again in 2007. In that year the British government officially ended its military support of the police in Northern Ireland (Operation Banner) and began withdrawing troops. On 27 June 2012, Northern Ireland's deputy first minister and former IRA commander, Martin McGuinness, shook hands with Queen Elizabeth II in Belfast, symbolising reconciliation between the two sides.[103]
Politics
 Political entities on the island of Ireland
The island is divided between the Republic of Ireland, an independent state, and Northern Ireland, a constituent country of the United Kingdom. They share an open border and both are part of the Common Travel Area and as a consequence, there is free movement of people, goods, services and capital across the border.
The Republic of Ireland is a member state of the European Union while the United Kingdom is a former member state, having both acceded to its precursor entity, the European Economic Community (EEC), in 1973 but the UK left the European Union in 2020 after a referendum on EU membership was held in 2016 which resulted in 51.9% of UK voters choosing to leave the bloc.
Republic of Ireland
Main article: Republic of Ireland
  ras an Uachtar in, the official residence of the President of Ireland
The Republic of Ireland is a parliamentary democracy based on the Westminster system, with a written constitution and a popularly elected president whose role is mostly ceremonial. The Oireachtas is a bicameral parliament, composed of D il  ireann (the D il), a house of representatives, and Seanad  ireann (the Seanad), an upper house. The government is headed by a prime minister, the Taoiseach, who is appointed by the president on the nomination of the D il. Its capital is Dublin.
The Republic of Ireland today ranks among the wealthiest countries in the world in terms of GDP per capita[104] and in 2015 was ranked the sixth most developed nation in the world by the United Nations' Human Development Index.[105] A period of rapid economic expansion from 1995 onwards became known as the Celtic Tiger period, was brought to an end in 2008 with an unprecedented financial crisis and an economic depression in 2009.
Northern Ireland
Main article: Northern Ireland
 Parliament Buildings, in Stormont Estate, seat of the Northern Ireland Assembly
Northern Ireland is a part of the United Kingdom with a local executive and assembly which exercise devolved powers. The executive is jointly headed by the first and deputy first minister, with the ministries being allocated in proportion to each party's representation in the assembly. Its capital is Belfast.
Ultimately political power is held by the UK government, from which Northern Ireland has gone through intermittent periods of direct rule during which devolved powers have been suspended. Northern Ireland elects 18 of the UK House of Commons' 650 MPs. The Northern Ireland Secretary is a cabinet-level post in the British government.
Along with England and Wales and with Scotland, Northern Ireland forms one of the three separate legal jurisdictions of the UK, all of which share the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom as their court of final appeal.
All-island institutions
As part of the Good Friday Agreement, the British and Irish governments agreed on the creation of all-island institutions and areas of cooperation. The North/South Ministerial Council is an institution through which ministers from the Government of Ireland and the Northern Ireland Executive agree all-island policies. At least six of these policy areas must have an associated all-island "implementation body," and at least six others must be implemented separately in each jurisdiction. The implementation bodies are: Waterways Ireland, the Food Safety Promotion Board, InterTradeIreland, the Special European Union Programmes Body, the North/South Language Body and the Foyle, Carlingford and Irish Lights Commission.
The British Irish Intergovernmental Conference provides for co-operation between the Government of Ireland and the Government of the United Kingdom on all matters of mutual interest, especially Northern Ireland. In light of the Republic's particular interest in the governance of Northern Ireland, "regular and frequent" meetings co-chaired by the ROI Minister for Foreign Affairs and the UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, dealing with non-devolved matters to do with Northern Ireland and non-devolved all-Ireland issues, are required to take place under the establishing treaty.
The North/South Inter-Parliamentary Association is a joint parliamentary forum for the island of Ireland. It has no formal powers but operates as a forum for discussing matters of common concern between the respective legislatures.
Geography
Main article: Geography of Ireland
 Physical features of Ireland
Ireland is located in the north-west of Europe, between latitudes 51  and 56  N, and longitudes 11  and 5  W. It is separated from Great Britain by the Irish Sea and the North Channel, which has a width of 23 kilometres (14 mi)[106] at its narrowest point. To the west is the northern Atlantic Ocean and to the south is the Celtic Sea, which lies between Ireland and Brittany, in France. Ireland has a total area of 84,421 km2 (32,595 sq mi),[1][2][107] of which the Republic of Ireland occupies 83 percent.[108] Ireland and Great Britain, together with many nearby smaller islands, are known collectively as the British Isles. As the term British Isles can be controversial in relation to Ireland, the alternate term Britain and Ireland is sometimes used as a neutral term for the islands.[109]
A ring of coastal mountains surrounds low plains at the centre of the island. The highest of these is Carrauntoohil (Irish: Corr n Tuathail) in County Kerry, which rises to 1,039 m (3,409 ft) above sea level.[110] The most arable land lies in the province of Leinster.[111] Western areas are mainly mountainous and rocky with green panoramic vistas. River Shannon, the island's longest river at 360.5 km (224 mi) long, rises in County Cavan in the north-west and flows through Limerick in the midwest.[110][112]
Geology
 Topography of Ireland
The island consists of varied geological provinces. In the west, around County Galway and County Donegal, is a medium to high grade metamorphic and igneous complex of Caledonide affinity, similar to the Scottish Highlands. Across southeast Ulster and extending southwest to Longford and south to Navan is a province of Ordovician and Silurian rocks, with similarities to the Southern Uplands province of Scotland. Further south, along the County Wexford coastline, is an area of granite intrusives into more Ordovician and Silurian rocks, like that found in Wales.[113][114]
In the southwest, around Bantry Bay and the mountains of MacGillycuddy's Reeks, is an area of substantially deformed, lightly metamorphosed Devonian-aged rocks.[115] This partial ring of "hard rock" geology is covered by a blanket of Carboniferous limestone over the centre of the country, giving rise to a comparatively fertile and lush landscape. The west-coast district of the Burren around Lisdoonvarna has well-developed karst features.[116] Significant stratiform lead-zinc mineralisation is found in the limestones around Silvermines and Tynagh.
Hydrocarbon exploration is ongoing following the first major find at the Kinsale Head gas field off Cork in the mid-1970s.[117][118] In 1999, economically significant finds of natural gas were made in the Corrib Gas Field off the County Mayo coast. This has increased activity off the west coast in parallel with the "West of Shetland" step-out development from the North Sea hydrocarbon province. In 2000, the Helvick oil field was discovered, which was estimated to contain over 28 million barrels (4,500,000 m3) of oil.[119]
Climate
Main article: Climate of Ireland
The island's lush vegetation, a product of its mild climate and frequent rainfall, earns it the sobriquet the Emerald Isle. Overall, Ireland has a mild but changeable oceanic climate with few extremes. The climate is typically insular and temperate, avoiding the extremes in temperature of many other areas in the world at similar latitudes.[120] This is a result of the moist winds which ordinarily prevail from the southwestern Atlantic.
Precipitation falls throughout the year but is light overall, particularly in the east. The west tends to be wetter on average and prone to Atlantic storms, especially in the late autumn and winter months. These occasionally bring destructive winds and higher total rainfall to these areas, as well as sometimes snow and hail. The regions of north County Galway and east County Mayo have the highest incidents of recorded lightning annually for the island, with lightning occurring approximately five to ten days per year in these areas.[121] Munster, in the south, records the least snow whereas Ulster, in the north, records the most.
Inland areas are warmer in summer and colder in winter. Usually around 40 days of the year are below freezing 0 C (32 F) at inland weather stations, compared to 10 days at coastal stations. Ireland is sometimes affected by heat waves, most recently in 1995, 2003, 2006, 2013 and 2018. In common with the rest of Europe, Ireland experienced unusually cold weather during the winter of 2010 11. Temperatures fell as low as  17.2 C (1 F) in County Mayo on 20 December[122] and up to a metre (3 ft) of snow fell in mountainous areas.
Climate data for Ireland
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high  C ( F)
18.5(65.3)
18.1(64.6)
23.6(74.5)
25.8(78.4)
28.4(83.1)
33.3(91.9)
33.0(91.4)
32.1(89.8)
29.1(84.4)
25.2(77.4)
20.1(68.2)
18.1(64.6)
33.3(91.9)
Record low  C ( F)
 19.1( 2.4)
 17.8(0.0)
 17.2(1.0)
 7.7(18.1)
 5.6(21.9)
 3.3(26.1)
 0.3(31.5)
 2.7(27.1)
 3(27)
 8.3(17.1)
 11.5(11.3)
 17.5(0.5)
 19.1( 2.4)
Source 1: Met  ireann[123]
Source 2: The Irish Times (November record high)[124]
Flora and fauna
Main articles: Fauna of Ireland, Flora of Ireland, and Trees of Britain and Ireland
 Two red foxes (Vulpes vulpes) in Gubbeen, County Cork
Unlike Great Britain which had a land bridge with mainland Europe, Ireland only had an ice bridge ending around 14,000 years ago at the end of the last ice age and as a result, it has fewer land animal and plant species than Great Britain or mainland Europe.[15][16] There are 55 mammal species in Ireland, and of them, only 26 land mammal species are considered native to Ireland.[125] Some species, such as, the red fox, hedgehog and badger, are very common, whereas others, like the Irish hare, red deer and pine marten are less so. Aquatic wildlife, such as species of sea turtle, shark, seal, whale, and dolphin, are common off the coast. About 400 species of birds have been recorded in Ireland. Many of these are migratory, including the barn swallow.
 Red deer (Cervus elaphus) in Killarney National Park
Several different habitat types are found in Ireland, including farmland, open woodland, temperate broadleaf and mixed forests, conifer plantations, peat bogs and a variety of coastal habitats. However, agriculture drives current land use patterns in Ireland, limiting natural habitat preserves,[126] particularly for larger wild mammals with greater territorial needs. With no large apex predators in Ireland other than humans and dogs, such populations of animals as semi-wild deer that cannot be controlled by smaller predators, such as the fox, are controlled by annual culling.
There are no snakes in Ireland, and only one species of reptile (the common lizard) is native to the island. Extinct species include the Irish elk, the great auk, brown bear and the wolf. Some previously extinct birds, such as the golden eagle, have been reintroduced after decades of extirpation.[127]
Ireland is now one of the least forested countries in Europe.[128][129] Until the end of the Middle Ages, Ireland was heavily forested. Native species include deciduous trees such as oak, ash, hazel, birch, alder, willow, aspen, rowan and hawthorn, as well as evergreen trees such Scots pine, yew, holly and strawberry trees.[130] Only about 10% of Ireland today is woodland;[9] most of this is non-native conifer plantations, and only 2% is native woodland.[10][11] The average woodland cover of European countries is over 33%.[9] In the Republic, about 389,356 hectares (3,893.56 km2) is owned by the state, mainly by the forestry service Coillte.[9] Remnants of native forest can be found scattered around the island, in particular in the Killarney National Park.
 Furze (Ulex europaeus)
Much of the land is now covered with pasture and there are many species of wild-flower. Gorse (Ulex europaeus), a wild furze, is commonly found growing in the uplands and ferns are plentiful in the more moist regions, especially in the western parts. It is home to hundreds of plant species, some of them unique to the island, and has been "invaded" by some grasses, such as Spartina anglica.[131]
The algal and seaweed flora is that of the cold-temperate variety. The total number of species is 574[132] The island has been invaded by some algae, some of which are now well established.[133]
Because of its mild climate, many species, including sub-tropical species such as palm trees, are grown in Ireland. Phytogeographically, Ireland belongs to the Atlantic European province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. The island can be subdivided into two ecoregions: the Celtic broadleaf forests and North Atlantic moist mixed forests.
Impact of agriculture
 Silage harvesting in Clonard, County Meath
The long history of agricultural production, coupled with modern intensive agricultural methods such as pesticide and fertiliser use and runoff from contaminants into streams, rivers and lakes, has placed pressure on biodiversity in Ireland.[134][135] A land of green fields for crop cultivation and cattle rearing limits the space available for the establishment of native wild species. Hedgerows, however, traditionally used for maintaining and demarcating land boundaries, act as a refuge for native wild flora. This ecosystem stretches across the countryside and acts as a network of connections to preserve remnants of the ecosystem that once covered the island. Subsidies under the Common Agricultural Policy, which supported agricultural practices that preserved hedgerow environments, are undergoing reforms. The Common Agricultural Policy had in the past subsidised potentially destructive agricultural practices, for example by emphasising production without placing limits on indiscriminate use of fertilisers and pesticides; but reforms have gradually decoupled subsidies from production levels and introduced environmental and other requirements.[136] 32% of Ireland's greenhouse gas emissions are correlated to agriculture.[137] Forested areas typically consist of monoculture plantations of non-native species, which may result in habitats that are not suitable for supporting native species of invertebrates. Natural areas require fencing to prevent over-grazing by deer and sheep that roam over uncultivated areas. Grazing in this manner is one of the main factors preventing the natural regeneration of forests across many regions of the country.[138]
Demographics
Main articles: Irish people, Demographics of the Republic of Ireland, and Demography of Northern Ireland
 Proportion of respondents to the Ireland census 2011 or the Northern Ireland census 2011 who stated they were Catholic. Areas in which Catholics are in the majority are blue. Areas in which Catholics are in a minority are red.
The population of Ireland is just over 7 million, of which approximately 5.1 million reside in the Republic of Ireland and 1.9 million reside in Northern Ireland.[5]
People have lived in Ireland for over 9,000 years. Early historical and genealogical records note the existence of major groups such as the Cruthin, Corcu Lo gde, D l Riata, D irine, Deirgtine, Delbhna,  rainn, Laigin, Ulaid. Later major groups included the Connachta, Ciannachta, E ganachta. Smaller groups included the aithechth atha (see Attacotti), C lraighe, C arraige, Conmaicne, Dartraighe, D isi,  ile, Fir Bolg, Fortuatha, Gailenga, Gamanraige, Mairtine, M scraige, Partraige, Soghain, Uaithni, U  Maine, U  Liath in. Many survived into late medieval times, others vanished as they became politically unimportant. Over the past 1,200 years, Vikings, Normans, Welsh, Flemings, Scots, English, Africans and Eastern Europeans have all added to the population and have had significant influences on Irish culture.
The population of Ireland rose rapidly from the 16th century until the mid-19th century, interrupted briefly by the Famine of 1740 41, which killed roughly two-fifths of the island's population. The population rebounded and multiplied over the next century, but the Great Famine of the 1840s caused one million deaths and forced over one million more to emigrate in its immediate wake. Over the following century, the population was reduced by over half, at a time when the general trend in European countries was for populations to rise by an average of three-fold.
Ireland's largest religious group is Christianity. The largest denomination is Roman Catholicism, representing over 73% of the island (and about 87% of the Republic of Ireland). Most of the rest of the population adhere to one of the various Protestant denominations (about 48% of Northern Ireland).[139] The largest is the Anglican Church of Ireland. The Muslim community is growing in Ireland, mostly through increased immigration, with a 50% increase in the republic between the 2006 and 2011 census.[140] The island has a small Jewish community. About 4% of the Republic's population and about 14% of the Northern Ireland population[139] describe themselves as of no religion. In a 2010 survey conducted on behalf of the Irish Times, 32% of respondents said they went to a religious service more than once per week.
Divisions and settlements
Further information: Provinces of Ireland, Counties of Ireland, and City status in Ireland
LeinsterConnachtUlsterMunsterclass=notpageimage| Provinces of Ireland
Traditionally, Ireland is subdivided into four provinces: Connacht (west), Leinster (east), Munster (south), and Ulster (north). In a system that developed between the 13th and 17th centuries,[141] Ireland has 32 traditional counties. Twenty-six of these counties are in the Republic of Ireland, and six are in Northern Ireland. The six counties that constitute Northern Ireland are all in the province of Ulster (which has nine counties in total). As such, Ulster is often used as a synonym for Northern Ireland, although the two are not coterminous. In the Republic of Ireland, counties form the basis of the system of local government. Counties Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Galway, Waterford and Tipperary have been broken up into smaller administrative areas. However, they are still treated as counties for cultural and some official purposes, for example, postal addresses and by the Ordnance Survey Ireland. Counties in Northern Ireland are no longer used for local governmental purposes,[142] but, as in the Republic, their traditional boundaries are still used for informal purposes such as sports leagues and in cultural or tourism contexts.[143]
City status in Ireland is decided by legislative or royal charter. Dublin, with over one million residents in the Greater Dublin Area, is the largest city on the island. Belfast, with 579,726 residents, is the largest city in Northern Ireland. City status does not directly equate with population size. For example, Armagh, with 14,590 is the seat of the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Primate of All Ireland and was re-granted city status by Queen Elizabeth II in 1994 (having lost that status in local government reforms of 1840). In the Republic of Ireland, Kilkenny, the seat of the Butler dynasty, while no longer a city for administrative purposes (since the 2001 Local Government Act), is entitled by law to continue to use the description.
  Largest cities or towns in IrelandSource?
Rank
Name
Pop.
DublinBelfast
1
Dublin
1,173,179[144]
Cork
2
Belfast
333,000[145]
3
Cork
208,669[146]
4
Limerick
94,192[146]
5
Derry
93,512
6
Galway
79,934[146]
7
Lisburn
71,465[147]
8
Craigavon
57,651[145]
9
Waterford
53,504[146]
10
Drogheda
40,956
Migration
 The population of Ireland since 1603 showing the consequence of the Great Famine (1845 52). Note: Figures before 1841 are contemporary estimates.
The population of Ireland collapsed dramatically during the second half of the 19th century. A population of over eight million in 1841 was reduced to slightly over four million by 1921. In part, the fall in population was caused by death from the Great Famine of 1845 to 1852, which took roughly one million lives. The remaining decline of around three million was due to the entrenched culture of emigration caused by the dire economic state of the country, lasting until the 21st century.
Emigration from Ireland in the 19th century contributed to the populations of England, the United States, Canada and Australia, in all of which a large Irish diaspora lives. As of 2006[update], 4.3 million Canadians, or 14% of the population, were of Irish descent,[148] while around one-third of the Australian population had an element of Irish descent.[149] As of 2013[update], there were 40 million Irish-Americans[150] and 33 million Americans who claimed Irish ancestry.[151]
With growing prosperity since the last decade of the 20th century, Ireland became a destination for immigrants. Since the European Union expanded to include Poland in 2004, Polish people have comprised the largest number of immigrants (over 150,000)[152] from Central Europe. There has also been significant immigration from Lithuania, Czech Republic and Latvia.[153]
The Republic of Ireland in particular has seen large-scale immigration, with 420,000 foreign nationals as of 2006, about 10% of the population.[154] Nearly a quarter of births (24 percent) in 2009 were to mothers born outside of Ireland.[155] Up to 50,000 eastern and central European migrant workers left Ireland in response to the Irish financial crisis.[156]
Languages
Main article: Languages of Ireland
 Proportion of respondents who said they could speak Irish in the Ireland census in 2011 or the Northern Ireland census in 2011
The two official languages of the Republic of Ireland are Irish and English. Each language has produced noteworthy literature. Irish, though now only the language of a minority, was the vernacular of the Irish people for thousands of years and was possibly introduced during the Iron Age. It began to be written down after Christianisation in the 5th century and spread to Scotland and the Isle of Man, where it evolved into the Scottish Gaelic and Manx languages respectively.
The Irish language has a vast treasury of written texts from many centuries and is divided by linguists into Old Irish from the 6th to 10th century, Middle Irish from the 10th to 13th century, Early Modern Irish until the 17th century, and the Modern Irish spoken today. It remained the dominant language of Ireland for most of those periods, having influences from Latin, Old Norse, French and English. It declined under British rule but remained the majority tongue until the early 19th century, and since then has been a minority language.
The Gaelic Revival of the late 19th and early 20th centuries had a long-term influence. Irish is taught in mainstream Irish schools as a compulsory subject, but teaching methods have been criticised for their ineffectiveness, with most students showing little evidence of fluency even after fourteen years of instruction.[157]
There is now a growing population of urban Irish speakers in both the Republic and Northern Ireland, especially in Dublin[158][159] and Belfast,[citation needed] with the children of such Irish speakers sometimes attending Irish-medium schools (Gaelscoil). It has been argued that they tend to be more highly educated than monolingual English speakers.[160] Recent research suggests that urban Irish is developing in a direction of its own, both in pronunciation and grammar.[161]
Traditional rural Irish-speaking areas, known collectively as the Gaeltacht, are in linguistic decline. The main Gaeltacht areas are in the west, south-west and north-west, in Galway, Mayo, Donegal, western Cork and Kerry with smaller Gaeltacht areas near Dungarvan in Waterford and in Meath.[162]
English in Ireland was first introduced during the Norman invasion. It was spoken by a few peasants and merchants brought over from England and was largely replaced by Irish before the Tudor conquest of Ireland. It was introduced as the official language during the Tudor and Cromwellian conquests. The Ulster plantations gave it a permanent foothold in Ulster, and it remained the official and upper-class language elsewhere, the Irish-speaking chieftains and nobility having been deposed. Language shift during the 19th century replaced Irish with English as the first language for a vast majority of the population.[163]
Fewer than 2% of the population of the Republic of Ireland today speak Irish on a daily basis, and under 10% regularly, outside of the education system[164] and 38% of those over 15 years are classified as "Irish speakers". In Northern Ireland, English is the de facto official language, but official recognition is afforded to Irish, including specific protective measures under Part III of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. A lesser status (including recognition under Part II of the Charter) is given to Ulster Scots dialects, which are spoken by roughly 2% of Northern Ireland residents, and also spoken by some in the Republic of Ireland.[165] Since the 1960s with the increase in immigration, many more languages have been introduced, particularly deriving from Asia and Eastern Europe.
Also native to Ireland are Shelta, the language of the nomadic Irish Travellers,[166] Irish Sign Language, and Northern Ireland Sign Language.
Culture
Main articles: Culture of Ireland and Culture of Northern Ireland
 Ardboe High Cross, County Tyrone
Ireland's culture comprises elements of the culture of ancient peoples, later immigrant and broadcast cultural influences (chiefly Gaelic culture, Anglicisation, Americanisation and aspects of broader European culture). In broad terms, Ireland is regarded as one of the Celtic nations of Europe, alongside Scotland, Wales, Cornwall, Isle of Man and Brittany. This combination of cultural influences is visible in the intricate designs termed Irish interlace or Celtic knotwork. These can be seen in the ornamentation of medieval religious and secular works. The style is still popular today in jewellery and graphic art,[167] as is the distinctive style of traditional Irish music and dance, and has become indicative of modern "Celtic" culture in general.
Religion has played a significant role in the cultural life of the island since ancient times (and since the 17th century plantations, has been the focus of political identity and divisions on the island). Ireland's pre-Christian heritage fused with the Celtic Church following the missions of Saint Patrick in the fifth century. The Hiberno-Scottish missions, begun by the Irish monk Saint Columba, spread the Irish vision of Christianity to pagan England and the Frankish Empire. These missions brought written language to an illiterate population of Europe during the Dark Ages that followed the fall of Rome, earning Ireland the sobriquet, "the island of saints and scholars".
Since the 20th century Irish pubs worldwide have become outposts of Irish culture, especially those with a full range of cultural and gastronomic offerings.
The Republic of Ireland's national theatre is the Abbey Theatre, which was founded in 1904, and the national Irish-language theatre is An Taibhdhearc, which was established in 1928 in Galway.[168][169] Playwrights such as Se n O'Casey, Brian Friel, Sebastian Barry, Conor McPherson and Billy Roche are internationally renowned.[170]
Arts
Main articles: Music of Ireland, Irish dance, Irish literature, Irish art, and Irish theatre
 Illuminated page from Book of Kells
Literature
Ireland has made a substantial contribution to world literature in all its branches, both in Irish and English. Poetry in Irish is among the oldest vernacular poetry in Europe, with the earliest examples dating from the 6th century.[citation needed]
Irish remained the dominant literary language down to the nineteenth century, despite the spread of English from the seventeenth century on. Prominent names from the medieval period and later include Gofraidh Fionn   D laigh (fourteenth century), D ibh    Bruadair (seventeenth century) and Aog n   Rathaille (eighteenth century). Eibhl n Dubh N  Chonaill (c. 1743   c. 1800) was an outstanding poet in the oral tradition. The latter part of the nineteenth century saw a rapid replacement of Irish by English.[citation needed] By 1900, however, cultural nationalists had begun the Gaelic revival, which saw the beginnings of modern literature in Irish. This was to produce a number of notable writers, including M irt n   Cadhain, M ire Mhac an tSaoi and others. Irish-language publishers such as Coisc im and Cl  Iar-Chonnacht continue to produce scores of titles every year.
In English, Jonathan Swift, often called the foremost satirist in the English language, gained fame for works such as Gulliver's Travels and A Modest Proposal. Other notable 18th-century writers of Irish origin included Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan, though they spent most of their lives in England. The Anglo-Irish novel came to the fore in the nineteenth century, featuring such writers as Charles Kickham, William Carleton, and (in collaboration) Edith Somerville and Violet Florence Martin. The playwright and poet Oscar Wilde, noted for his epigrams, was born in Ireland.
In the 20th century, Ireland produced four winners of the Nobel Prize for Literature: George Bernard Shaw, William Butler Yeats, Samuel Beckett and Seamus Heaney. Although not a Nobel Prize winner, James Joyce is widely considered to be one of the most significant writers of the 20th century. Joyce's 1922 novel Ulysses is considered one of the most important works of Modernist literature and his life is celebrated annually on 16 June in Dublin as "Bloomsday".[171] A comparable writer in Irish is M irt n   Cadhain, whose 1949 novel Cr  na Cille is regarded as a modernist masterpiece and has been translated into several languages.
Modern Irish literature is often connected with its rural heritage[172] through English-language writers such as John McGahern and Seamus Heaney and Irish-language writers such as M irt n   Dire in and others from the Gaeltacht.
 James Joyce, one of the most significant writers of the 20th century
Music
Music has been in evidence in Ireland since prehistoric times.[173] Although in the early Middle Ages the church was "quite unlike its counterpart in continental Europe",[174] there was a considerable interchange between monastic settlements in Ireland and the rest of Europe that contributed to what is known as Gregorian chant. Outside religious establishments, musical genres in early Gaelic Ireland are referred to as a triad of weeping music (goltraige), laughing music (geantraige) and sleeping music (suantraige).[175] Vocal and instrumental music (e.g. for the harp, pipes, and various string instruments) was transmitted orally, but the Irish harp, in particular, was of such significance that it became Ireland's national symbol. Classical music following European models first developed in urban areas, in establishments of Anglo-Irish rule such as Dublin Castle, St Patrick's Cathedral and Christ Church as well as the country houses of the Anglo-Irish ascendancy, with the first performance of Handel's Messiah (1742) being among the highlights of the baroque era. In the 19th century, public concerts provided access to classical music to all classes of society. Yet, for political and financial reasons Ireland has been too small to provide a living to many musicians, so the names of the better-known Irish composers of this time belong to emigrants.
Irish traditional music and dance have seen a surge in popularity and global coverage since the 1960s. In the middle years of the 20th century, as Irish society was modernising, traditional music had fallen out of favour, especially in urban areas.[176] However during the 1960s, there was a revival of interest in Irish traditional music led by groups such as The Dubliners, The Chieftains, The Wolfe Tones, the Clancy Brothers, Sweeney's Men and individuals like Se n   Riada and Christy Moore. Groups and musicians including Horslips, Van Morrison and Thin Lizzy incorporated elements of Irish traditional music into contemporary rock music and, during the 1970s and 1980s, the distinction between traditional and rock musicians became blurred, with many individuals regularly crossing over between these styles of playing. This trend can be seen more recently in the work of artists like Enya, The Saw Doctors, The Corrs, Sin ad O'Connor, Clannad, The Cranberries and The Pogues among others.
Art
The earliest known Irish graphic art and sculpture are Neolithic carvings found at sites such as Newgrange[177] and is traced through Bronze Age artefacts and the religious carvings and illuminated manuscripts of the medieval period. During the course of the 19th and 20th centuries, a strong tradition of painting emerged, including such figures as John Butler Yeats, William Orpen, Jack Yeats and Louis le Brocquy. Contemporary Irish visual artists of note include Sean Scully, Kevin Abosch, and Alice Maher.
Science
 Robert Boyle formulated Boyle's Law.
The Irish philosopher and theologian Johannes Scotus Eriugena was considered one of the leading intellectuals of the early Middle Ages. Sir Ernest Henry Shackleton, an Irish explorer, was one of the principal figures of Antarctic exploration. He, along with his expedition, made the first ascent of Mount Erebus and the discovery of the approximate location of the South Magnetic Pole. Robert Boyle was a 17th-century natural philosopher, chemist, physicist, inventor and early gentleman scientist. He is largely regarded as one of the founders of modern chemistry and is best known for the formulation of Boyle's law.[178]
19th-century physicist, John Tyndall, discovered the Tyndall effect. Father Nicholas Joseph Callan, Professor of Natural Philosophy in Maynooth College, is best known for his invention of the induction coil, transformer and he discovered an early method of galvanisation in the 19th century.
Other notable Irish physicists include Ernest Walton, winner of the 1951 Nobel Prize in Physics. With Sir John Douglas Cockcroft, he was the first to split the nucleus of the atom by artificial means and made contributions to the development of a new theory of wave equation.[179] William Thomson, or Lord Kelvin, is the person whom the absolute temperature unit, the kelvin, is named after. Sir Joseph Larmor, a physicist and mathematician, made innovations in the understanding of electricity, dynamics, thermodynamics and the electron theory of matter. His most influential work was Aether and Matter, a book on theoretical physics published in 1900.[180]
George Johnstone Stoney introduced the term electron in 1891. John Stewart Bell was the originator of Bell's Theorem and a paper concerning the discovery of the Bell-Jackiw-Adler anomaly and was nominated for a Nobel prize.[181] The astronomer Jocelyn Bell Burnell, from Lurgan, County Armagh, discovered pulsars in 1967. Notable mathematicians include Sir William Rowan Hamilton, famous for work in classical mechanics and the invention of quaternions. Francis Ysidro Edgeworth's contribution, the Edgeworth Box. remains influential in neo-classical microeconomic theory to this day; while Richard Cantillon inspired Adam Smith, among others. John B. Cosgrave was a specialist in number theory and discovered a 2000-digit prime number in 1999 and a record composite Fermat number in 2003. John Lighton Synge made progress in different fields of science, including mechanics and geometrical methods in general relativity. He had mathematician John Nash as one of his students. Kathleen Lonsdale, born in Ireland and most known for her work with crystallography, became the first female president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science.[182]
Ireland has nine universities, seven in the Republic of Ireland and two in Northern Ireland, including Trinity College Dublin and the University College Dublin, as well as numerous third-level colleges and institutes and a branch of the Open University, the Open University in Ireland. Ireland was ranked 23th in the Global Innovation Index in 2022, down from 12th in 2019.[183][184]
Sports
Main article: Sport in Ireland
See also: List of Irish sports people
Gaelic football is the most popular sport in Ireland in terms of match attendance and community involvement, with about 2,600 clubs on the island. In 2003 it represented 34% of total sports attendances at events in Ireland and abroad, followed by hurling at 23%, soccer at 16% and rugby at 8%.[185] The All-Ireland Football Final is the most watched event in the sporting calendar.[186] Soccer is the most widely played team game on the island and the most popular in Northern Ireland.[185][187]
Other sporting activities with the highest levels of playing participation include swimming, golf, aerobics, cycling, and billiards/snooker.[188] Many other sports are also played and followed, including boxing, cricket, fishing, greyhound racing, handball, hockey, horse racing, motor sport, show jumping and tennis.
The island fields a single international team in most sports. One notable exception to this is association football, although both associations continued to field international teams under the name "Ireland" until the 1950s. The sport is also the most notable exception where the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland field separate international teams. Northern Ireland has produced two World Snooker Champions.
Field sports
 Tyrone v Kerry in the 2005 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship Final
Gaelic football, hurling and Gaelic handball are the best-known Irish traditional sports, collectively known as Gaelic games. Gaelic games are governed by the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA), with the exception of women's Gaelic football and camogie (women's variant of hurling), which are governed by separate organisations. The headquarters of the GAA (and the main stadium) is located at [189] Croke Park in north Dublin and has a capacity of 82,500. Many major GAA games are played there, including the semi-finals and finals of the All-Ireland Senior Football Championship and All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship. During the redevelopment of the Lansdowne Road stadium in 2007 2010, international rugby and soccer were played there.[190] All GAA players, even at the highest level, are amateurs, receiving no wages, although they are permitted to receive a limited amount of sport-related income from commercial sponsorship.
The Irish Football Association (IFA) was originally the governing body for soccer across the island. The game has been played in an organised fashion in Ireland since the 1870s, with Cliftonville F.C. in Belfast being Ireland's oldest club. It was most popular, especially in its first decades, around Belfast and in Ulster. However, some clubs based outside Belfast thought that the IFA largely favoured Ulster-based clubs in such matters as selection for the national team. In 1921, following an incident in which, despite an earlier promise, the IFA moved an Irish Cup semi-final replay from Dublin to Belfast,[191] Dublin-based clubs broke away to form the Football Association of the Irish Free State. Today the southern association is known as the Football Association of Ireland (FAI). Despite being initially blacklisted by the Home Nations' associations, the FAI was recognised by FIFA in 1923 and organised its first international fixture in 1926 (against Italy). However, both the IFA and FAI continued to select their teams from the whole of Ireland, with some players earning international caps for matches with both teams. Both also referred to their respective teams as Ireland.
 Paul O'Connell reaching for the ball during a line out against Argentina in 2007
In 1950, FIFA directed the associations only to select players from within their respective territories and, in 1953, directed that the FAI's team be known only as "Republic of Ireland" and that the IFA's team be known as "Northern Ireland" (with certain exceptions). Northern Ireland qualified for the World Cup finals in 1958 (reaching the quarter-finals), 1982 and 1986 and the European Championship in 2016. The Republic qualified for the World Cup finals in 1990 (reaching the quarter-finals), 1994, 2002 and the European Championship in 1988, 2012 and 2016. Across Ireland, there is significant interest in the English and, to a lesser extent, Scottish soccer leagues.
Ireland fields a single national rugby team and a single association, the Irish Rugby Football Union, governs the sport across the island. The Irish rugby team have played in every Rugby World Cup, making the quarter-finals in six of them. Ireland also hosted games during the 1991 and the 1999 Rugby World Cups (including a quarter-final). There are four professional Irish teams; all four play in the Pro14 and at least three compete for the Heineken Cup. Irish rugby has become increasingly competitive at both the international and provincial levels since the sport went professional in 1994. During that time, Ulster (1999),[192] Munster (2006[193] and 2008)[192] and Leinster (2009, 2011 and 2012)[192] have won the Heineken Cup. In addition to this, the Irish International side has had increased success in the Six Nations Championship against the other European elite sides. This success, including Triple Crowns in 2004, 2006 and 2007, culminated with a clean sweep of victories, known as a Grand Slam, in 2009 and 2018.[194]
Boxing
Amateur boxing on the island of Ireland is governed by the Irish Athletic Boxing Association. Ireland has won more medals in boxing than in any other Olympic sport. Michael Carruth won a gold medal and Wayne McCullough won a silver medal in the Barcelona Olympic Games. In 2008 Kenneth Egan won a silver medal in the Beijing Games.[195] Paddy Barnes secured bronze in those games and gold in the 2010 European Amateur Boxing Championships (where Ireland came 2nd in the overall medal table) and 2010 Commonwealth Games. Katie Taylor has won gold in every European and World championship since 2005. In August 2012 at the Olympic Games in London, Taylor created history by becoming the first Irish woman to win a gold medal in boxing in the 60 kg lightweight.[196] More recently, Kellie Harrington won a gold medal at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics.[197]
Other sports
 Horse racing in Sligo
Horse racing and greyhound racing are both popular in Ireland. There are frequent horse race meetings and greyhound stadiums are well-attended. The island is noted for the breeding and training of race horses and is also a large exporter of racing dogs.[198] The horse racing sector is largely concentrated in the County Kildare.[199]
Irish athletics is an all-Ireland sport governed by Athletics Ireland. Sonia O'Sullivan won two medals at 5,000 metres on the track; gold at the 1995 World Championships and silver at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. Gillian O'Sullivan won silver in the 20k walk at the 2003 World Championships, while sprint hurdler Derval O'Rourke won gold at the 2006 World Indoor Championship in Moscow. Olive Loughnane won a silver medal in the 20k walk at the World Athletics Championships in Berlin in 2009.[200]
Golf is very popular, and golf tourism is a major industry attracting more than 240,000 golfing visitors annually.[201] The 2006 Ryder Cup was held at The K Club in County Kildare.[202] P draig Harrington became the first Irishman since Fred Daly in 1947 to win the British Open at Carnoustie in July 2007.[203] He successfully defended his title in July 2008[204] before going on to win the PGA Championship in August.[205] Harrington became the first European to win the PGA Championship in 78 years and was the first winner from Ireland. Three golfers from Northern Ireland have been particularly successful. In 2010, Graeme McDowell became the first Irish golfer to win the U.S. Open, and the first European to win that tournament since 1970. Rory McIlroy, at the age of 22, won the 2011 U.S. Open, while Darren Clarke's latest victory was the 2011 Open Championship at Royal St. George's. In August 2012, McIlroy won his 2nd major championship by winning the USPGA Championship by a record margin of 8 shots.
Recreation
The west coast of Ireland, Lahinch and Donegal Bay in particular, have popular surfing beaches, being fully exposed to the Atlantic Ocean. Donegal Bay is shaped like a funnel and catches west/south-west Atlantic winds, creating good surf, especially in winter. Since just before the year 2010, Bundoran has hosted European championship surfing. Scuba diving is increasingly popular in Ireland with clear waters and large populations of sea life, particularly along the western seaboard. There are also many shipwrecks along the coast of Ireland, with some of the best wreck dives being in Malin Head and off the County Cork coast.[206]
With thousands of lakes, over 14,000 kilometres (8,700 mi) of fish-bearing rivers and over 7,500 kilometres (4,660 mi) of coastline, Ireland is a popular angling destination. The temperate Irish climate is suited to sport angling. While salmon and trout fishing remain popular with anglers, salmon fishing, in particular, received a boost in 2006 with the closing of the salmon driftnet fishery. Coarse fishing continues to increase its profile. Sea angling is developed with many beaches mapped and signposted,[207] and the range of sea angling species is around 80.[208]
Food and drink
Main article: Irish cuisine
 Gubbeen cheese, an example of the resurgence in Irish cheese making
Food and cuisine in Ireland take their influence from the crops grown and animals farmed in the island's temperate climate and from the social and political circumstances of Irish history. For example, whilst from the Middle Ages until the arrival of the potato in the 16th century the dominant feature of the Irish economy was the herding of cattle, the number of cattle a person owned was equated to their social standing.[209] Thus herders would avoid slaughtering a milk-producing cow.[209]
For this reason, pork and white meat were more common than beef, and thick fatty strips of salted bacon (known as rashers) and the eating of salted butter (i.e. a dairy product rather than beef itself) have been a central feature of the diet in Ireland since the Middle Ages.[209] The practice of bleeding cattle and mixing the blood with milk and butter (not unlike the practice of the Maasai) was common[210] and black pudding, made from blood, grain (usually barley) and seasoning, remains a breakfast staple in Ireland. All of these influences can be seen today in the phenomenon of the "breakfast roll".
The introduction of the potato in the second half of the 16th century heavily influenced cuisine thereafter. Great poverty encouraged a subsistence approach to food, and by the mid-19th century, the vast majority of the population sufficed with a diet of potatoes and milk.[211] A typical family, consisting of a man, a woman and four children, would eat 18 stone (110 kg) of potatoes per week.[209] Consequently, dishes that are considered as national dishes represent a fundamental simplicity to cooking, such as the Irish stew, bacon and cabbage, boxty, a type of potato pancake, or colcannon, a dish of mashed potatoes and kale or cabbage.[209]
Since the last quarter of the 20th century, with a re-emergence of wealth in Ireland, a "New Irish Cuisine" based on traditional ingredients incorporating international influences[212] has emerged.[213] This cuisine is based on fresh vegetables, fish (especially salmon, trout, oysters, mussels and other shellfish), as well as traditional soda breads and the wide range of hand-made cheeses that are now being produced across the country. An example of this new cuisine is "Dublin Lawyer": lobster cooked in whiskey and cream.[214] The potato remains however a fundamental feature of this cuisine and the Irish remain the highest per capita[209] consumers of potatoes in Europe. Traditional regional foods can be found throughout the country, for example coddle in Dublin or drisheen in Cork, both a type of sausage, or blaa, a doughy white bread particular to Waterford.
 The Old Bushmills Distillery in County Antrim
Ireland once dominated the world's market for whiskey, producing 90% of the world's whiskey at the start of the 20th century. However, as a consequence of bootleggers during the prohibition in the United States (who sold poor-quality whiskey bearing Irish-sounding names thus eroding the pre-prohibition popularity for Irish brands)[215] and tariffs on Irish whiskey across the British Empire during the Anglo-Irish Trade War of the 1930s,[216] sales of Irish whiskey worldwide fell to a mere 2% by the mid-20th century.[217] In 1953, an Irish government survey, found that 50% of whiskey drinkers in the United States had never heard of Irish whiskey.[218]
Irish whiskey, as researched in 2009 by the CNBC American broadcaster, remains popular domestically and has grown in international sales steadily over a few decades.[219] Typically CNBC states Irish whiskey is not as smoky as a Scotch whisky, but not as sweet as American or Canadian whiskies.[219] Whiskey forms the basis of cream liqueurs, such as Baileys, and the "Irish coffee" (a cocktail of coffee and whiskey reputedly invented at Foynes flying-boat station) is probably the best-known Irish cocktail.
Stout, a kind of porter beer, particularly Guinness, is typically associated with Ireland, although historically it was more closely associated with London. Porter remains very popular, although it has lost sales since the mid-20th century to lager. Cider, particularly Magners (marketed in the Republic of Ireland as Bulmers), is also a popular drink. Red lemonade, a soft-drink, is consumed on its own and as a mixer, particularly with whiskey.[220]
Economy
Main articles: Economy of the Republic of Ireland and Economy of Northern Ireland
See also: International Financial Services Centre, Dublin
 A proportional representation of Ireland exports, 2019
Overview and GDP
The GDP of the Republic of Ireland as of 2021[update] was  423.5 billion (nominal),[221] and in Northern Ireland as of 2016[update] it was  43 billion (nominal).[222]
The GDP per capita in the Republic of Ireland was  84,049.9 (nominal) as of 2021[update],[221] and in Northern Ireland (as of 2016[update]) was  23,700.[222]
Despite the two jurisdictions using two distinct currencies (the euro and pound sterling), a growing amount of commercial activity is carried out on an all-Ireland basis. This has been facilitated by the two jurisdictions' former shared membership of the European Union, and there have been calls from members of the business community and policymakers for the creation of an "all-Ireland economy" to take advantage of economies of scale and boost competitiveness.[223]
Regional economics
Below is a comparison of the regional GDP on the island of Ireland.
Republic of Ireland: Northern and Western
Republic of Ireland: Eastern and Midland
Republic of Ireland: Southern
United Kingdom: Northern Ireland
GDP (2018[update]):  22 bn[224]
GDP (2018[update]):  175 bn[224]
GDP (2018[update]):  127 bn[224]
GDP (2012[update]):  43.4 bn[225]
 24,926 per person[225]
 74,824 per person[225]
 77,794 per person[225]
 21,000 per person[225]
Economic history
Main article: Economic history of Ireland
Prior to partition in 1921, Ireland had a long history as an economic colony   first, partially, of the Norse, via their cities (9th to 10th centuries CE), and later of England. Though the climate and soil favoured certain forms of agriculture,[226] trade barriers frequently hobbled its development. Repeated invasions and plantations disrupted land-ownership, and multiple failed uprisings also contributed to repeated phases of deportation and of emigration.
Salient events in the economic history of Ireland include:
16th and 17th centuries: confiscation and redistribution of land in the Plantations of Ireland
1845 1849: The Great Famine occasioned depopulation and mass emigration
1846: Westminster's repeal of the Corn Laws disrupted Irish agriculture[227]
Major industries
Tourism
Main article: Tourist destinations in Ireland
 Inisheer (Inis O rr), Aran Islands
There are three World Heritage Sites on the island: the Br  na B inne complex, Skellig Michael and the Giant's Causeway.[228] Several other places are on the tentative list, for example the Burren, the Ceide Fields[229] and Mount Stewart.[230]
Some of the most visited sites in Ireland include Bunratty Castle, the Rock of Cashel, the Cliffs of Moher, Holy Cross Abbey and Blarney Castle.[231] Historically important monastic sites include Glendalough and Clonmacnoise, which are maintained as national monuments in the Republic of Ireland.[232]
The Dublin region receives the most tourists[231] and is home to several of the most popular attractions such as the Guinness Storehouse and Book of Kells.[231] The west and south west, which includes the Lakes of Killarney and the Dingle peninsula in County Kerry and Connemara and the Aran Islands in County Galway, are also popular tourist destinations.[231]
Achill Island lies off the coast of County Mayo and is Ireland's largest island. It is a popular tourist destination for surfing and contains 5 Blue Flag beaches and Croaghaun one of the world's highest sea cliffs. Stately homes, built during the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries in Palladian, Neoclassical and neo-Gothic styles, such as Castle Ward, Castletown House, Bantry House, Strokestown Park and Glenveagh Castle are also of interest to tourists. Some have been converted into hotels, such as Ashford Castle, Castle Leslie and Dromoland Castle.[citation needed]
Energy
Although for most of their existence electricity networks in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland were entirely separate, the island has operated for some time as a single market for electricity.[233] Both networks were designed and constructed independently post-partition but they are now connected with three interlinks[234] and are also connected through Great Britain to mainland Europe. The situation in Northern Ireland is complicated by the issue of private companies not supplying Northern Ireland Electricity with enough power. In the Republic of Ireland, the ESB has failed to modernise its power stations, and the availability of power plants has recently averaged only 66%, one of the worst such rates in Western Europe. EirGrid has started building a HVDC transmission line between Ireland and Great Britain with a capacity of 500 MW,[235] about 10% of Ireland's peak demand.
As with electricity, the natural gas distribution network is also now all-island, with a pipeline linking Gormanston, County Meath, and Ballyclare, County Antrim.[236] Most of Ireland's gas comes through interconnectors between Twynholm in Scotland and Ballylumford, County Antrim and Loughshinny, County Dublin. Supplies come from the Corrib Gas Field, off the coast of County Mayo, with a supply previously also coming from the Kinsale gas field off the County Cork coast.[237][238] The County Mayo field faces some localised opposition over a controversial decision to refine the gas onshore.
 Turf-cutting near Maam Cross by the road to Leenane, Co. Galway
Ireland has an ancient industry based on peat (known locally as "turf") as a source of energy for home fires. A form of biomass energy, this source of heat is still widely used in rural areas. However, because of the ecological importance of peatlands in storing carbon and their rarity, the EU is attempting to protect this habitat by fining Ireland for digging up peat. In cities, heat is generally supplied by natural gas or heating oil, although some urban suppliers distribute sods of turf as "smokeless fuel" for domestic use.
The Republic has a strong commitment to renewable energy and ranks as one of the top 10 markets for clean-technology investment in the 2014 Global Green Economy Index.[239] Research and development in renewable energy (such as wind power) has increased since 2004. Large wind farms have been constructed in Cork, Donegal, Mayo and Antrim. The construction of wind farms has in some cases been delayed by opposition from local communities, some of whom regard the wind turbines as unsightly. The Republic is hindered by an ageing network that was not designed to handle the varying availability of power that comes from wind farms. The ESB's Turlough Hill facility is the only power-storage facility in the state.[240]
Explanatory notes
^ Numbers vary, from a low of 12,000.[64] Giovanni Battista Rinuccini wrote 50,000,[65] T. N. Burke said 80,000 to 100,000.[65]
References
^ a b Nolan, William. "Geography of Ireland". Government of Ireland. Archived from the original on 24 November 2009. Retrieved 11 November 2009.
^ a b Royle, Stephen A. (1 December 2012). "Beyond the boundaries in the island of Ireland". Journal of Marine and Island Cultures. 1 (2): 91 98. doi:10.1016/j.imic.2012.11.005.
^ "Irish Coastal Habitats: A Study of Impacts on Designated Conservation Areas" (PDF). heritagecouncil.ie. Heritage Council. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020.
^ Neilson, Brigitte; Costello, Mark J. (22 April 1999). "The Relative Lengths of Seashore Substrata Around the Coastline of Ireland as Determined by Digital Methods in a Geographical Information System". Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science. Environmental Sciences Unit, Trinity College, Dublin. 49 (4): 501 508. Bibcode:1999ECSS...49..501N. doi:10.1006/ecss.1999.0507. S2CID 128982465. Archived from the original on 13 July 2021. Retrieved 13 July 2021.
^ a b c The 2022 population of the Republic of Ireland was 5,123,536 and that of Northern Ireland in 2021 was 1,903,100. These are Census data from the official governmental statistics agencies in the respective jurisdictions:
Central Statistics Office, Ireland (23 June 2022). "Census of Population 2022   Preliminary Results". Dublin: Central Statistics Office, Ireland. Retrieved 23 June 2022.
Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (2022). "2021 Census". Belfast: Department of Finance. Retrieved 23 June 2022.
^ "This is Ireland: Highlights from Census 2011 Part 1". Central Statistics Office. March 2012. p. 94. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2014.
^ "Census 2011, Key Statistics for Northern Ireland" (PDF). Department of Finance and Personnel's Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency. December 2012. p. 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2014.
^ "Islands by Area". UN System-Wide Earthwatch. United Nations Environment Programme. 18 February 1998. Archived from the original on 1 December 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2008.
^ a b c d "Forest Statistics   Ireland 2017" (PDF). Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine. pp. 3, 63. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 October 2019. Retrieved 29 January 2019.
^ a b "Native trees cover just 2% of Ireland. How can this be increased?" Archived 4 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine. The Irish Times, 6 July 2018. Retrieved 29 January 2019.
^ a b "Ireland s native woodlands are quietly disappearing" Archived 16 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine. The Irish Times, 19 June 2018. Retrieved 29 January 2019.
^ "Climate of Ireland Archived 16 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Met  ireann. Retrieved 25 November 2017
^ N  Mhurch , S le (2017). " riu".  In Echard, Sian; Rouse, Robert (eds.). The Encyclopedia of Medieval Literature in Britain, 4 Volume Set. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. p. 750. ISBN 978-1-118-39698-8. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
^ a b c d "Prehistoric Details". National Museum of Ireland. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
^ a b Andrew Cooper & D. Jackson. "Sea-level change and inner shelf stratigraphy off Northern Ireland". academia.edu. Marine Geology. Retrieved 25 February 2022.
^ a b Edwards, Robin & al. "The Island of Ireland: Drowning the Myth of an Irish Land-bridge? Archived 19 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine" Accessed 15 February 2013.
^ Lane, Megan. "The moment Britain became an island". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 19 July 2017.
^ "Earliest evidence of humans in Ireland". BBC News. 21 March 2016. Archived from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
^ Roseingrave, Louise (18 April 2021). "Reindeer bone found in north Cork to alter understanding of Irish human history". Irish Examiner. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2021.
^ Driscoll, Killian. "The early prehistory in the west of Ireland: Investigations into the social archaeology of the Mesolithic, west of the Shannon, Ireland". LithicsIreland.ie. Lithics Ireland Consultancy. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 19 July 2017.
^ Cooney, Gabriel (2000). Landscapes of Neolithic Ireland. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-16977-6.
^ a b "Prehistoric Genocide in Ireland?" (PDF). Ireland's DNA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
^ Heritage Ireland. "C ide Fields". Office of Public Works. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 23 October 2008.
^ a b Reich, David (2018). Who We Are and How We Got Here: Ancient DNA and the New Science of the Human Past. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 115. ISBN 978-0-19-882125-0.
^ "O'Donnell Lecture 2008 Appendix" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 27 May 2010.
^ Koch, John (2009). "Tartessian: Celtic from the Southwest at the Dawn of History" (PDF). Palaeohispanica. 9 (Acta Palaeohispanica X): 339 351. ISSN 1578-5386. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 June 2010. Retrieved 17 May 2010.
^ John T. Koch; Barry Cunliffe, eds. (2010). Celtic from the West: Alternative Perspectives from Archaeology, Genetics, Language and Literature. Oxbow Books and Celtic Studies Publications. p. 384. ISBN 978-1-84217-529-3. Retrieved 28 October 2016.
^ Cunliffe, Barry (2008). A Race Apart: Insularity and Connectivity in Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 75, 2009, pp. 55 64. The Prehistoric Society. p. 61.
^ Burton, Holly (1979). "The Arrival of the Celts in Ireland". Penn Museum. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2020.
^ The Celts: A History, by D ith    h g in
^ Early Peoples of Britain and Ireland: A-G Christopher Allen Snyder
^ "A History of Ireland: From the Earliest Times to 1922" By Edmund Curtis
^ Waddell, John (April 1995). Ireland in the Bronze Age (PDF). Dublin: Irish Government Stationery Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2015.
^ Waddell, John (September 1992). The Question of the Celticization of Ireland (PDF). Emania. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2015.
^ McEvoy, B.; Richards, M.; Forster, P.; Bradley, D.G. (October 2004). "The Longue Dur e of Genetic Ancestry: Multiple Genetic Marker Systems and Celtic Origins on the Atlantic Facade of Europe". American Journal of Human Genetics. 75 (4): 693 702. doi:10.1086/424697. PMC 1182057. PMID 15309688.
^ Hay, Maciamo. "Haplogroup R1b (Y-DNA)". Eupedia. Archived from the original on 22 August 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2015.
^ Freeman, Philip (2001). Ireland and the classical world. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-292-72518-8. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
^ Freeman, Philip (2001). Ireland and the Classical World. Austin: University of Texas Press.
^ O'Hart, John (1892). Irish Pedigrees: or, The Origin and Stem of the Irish Nation. Dublin: J. Duffy and Co. p. 725.
^ Bury, J.B. (1922). "Tacitus, Agricola, C. 24". Journal of Roman Studies. 12: 57 59. doi:10.2307/296171. JSTOR 296171. S2CID 163531116. Retrieved 17 October 2018   via uchicago.edu.
^ Darcy, R.; Flynn, William (March 2008). "Ptolemy's Map of Ireland: a Modern Decoding". Irish Geography. 14 (1): 49 69. doi:10.1080/00750770801909375   via Informaworld.com.
^ Carson, R.A.G. and O'Kelly, Claire: A catalogue of the Roman coins from Newgrange, Co. Meath and notes on the coins and related finds, pp. 35 55. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, volume 77, section C
^ D ibh    Cr in n, "Ireland, 400 800", in D ibh    Cr in n (ed.), A New History of Ireland 1: Prehistoric and Early Ireland, Oxford University Press, 2005, pp. 182 234.
^ Jaski, Bart (2005). "Kings and kingship".  In Se n Duffy (ed.). Medieval Ireland. An Encyclopedia. Abingdon and New York. pp. 251 254 [253].
^ Ginnell, Laurence (1894). The Brehon Laws: A Legal Handbook. T. Fisher Unwin. p. 81.
^ Moran, Patrick Francis (1913). "St. Palladius" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
^ De Paor, Liam (1993). Saint Patrick's World: The Christian culture of Ireland's Apostolic Age. Dublin: Four Courts Press. pp. 78, 79. ISBN 978-1-85182-144-0.
^ a b Cahill, Tim (1996). How the Irish Saved Civilization. Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-41849-2.
^ Dowley, Tim;  et al., eds. (1977). Eerdman's Handbook to the History of Christianity. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-3450-8.
^ Stokes, Margaret (1888). Early Christian Art in Ireland. London: Chapman and Hall. pp. 9, 87, 117. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
^ Bartlett, Thomas (2010). Ireland: A History. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-19720-5.
^   Corr in, Donnchadh. "Vikings & Ireland" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved 19 March 2010.
^ "Ireland's History in Maps (800 AD)". Rootsweb.ancestry.com. Ancestry Publishing. 6 December 1998. Archived from the original on 9 August 2011. Retrieved 15 August 2011.
^ Chrisafis, Angelique (25 January 2005). "Scion of traitors and warlords: Why Bush is coy about his Irish links". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 29 August 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2008.
^ Previt -Orton, Charles (1975). The Shorter Cambridge Medieval History. Cambridge University Press. p. 810. ISBN 978-0-521-09977-6.
^ Curtis, Edmund (2002). A History of Ireland from Earliest Times to 1922. New York: Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-415-27949-9.
^ Edwards, Ruth;  et al. (2005). An Atlas of Irish History. Routledge. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-415-33952-0.
^   Clabaigh, Colm n N. (2005). "Papacy".  In Se n Duffy (ed.). Medieval Ireland. An Encyclopedia. Abingdon and New York. pp. 361 362.
^ Hosler, John D.;  et al. (2007). Henry II: A Medieval Soldier at War, 1147 1189. Brill Academic Publishers. p. 239. ISBN 978-90-04-15724-8.
^ Bolton, Brenda (2003). Adrian IV, the English Pope, 1154 1159: Studies and Texts. Ashgate Publishing. p. 149. ISBN 978-0-7546-0708-3.
^ "The Great Irish Famine: Laws that Isolated and Impoverished the Irish" (PDF). Irish Famine Curriculum Committee. New Jersey Commission on Holocaust Education. 1998. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2011.
^ Pack, Mark (2001). "Charles James Fox, the Repeal of Poynings Law, and the Act of Union: 1782 1801". Journal of Liberal History. 33: 6. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 23 March 2015.
^ "Th tre de tous les peuples et nations de la terre avec leurs habits et ornemens divers, tant anciens que modernes, diligemment depeints au naturel par Luc Dheere peintre et sculpteur Gantois[manuscript]". lib.ugent.be. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 25 August 2020.
^ Foster, Robert Fitzroy (1989). Modern Ireland. Penguin Books. p. 107. ISBN 978-0-14-013250-2. '[S]lave-hunts' certainly happened, though their extent has been exaggerated; there were probably 12,000 Irish in the West Indies by the late 1600s
^ a b O'Callaghan, Sean (2000). To Hell or Barbados. Brandon. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-86322-287-0.
^ "A Short History of Ireland: The Curse of Cromwell". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 8 November 2008.
^ "Laws in Ireland for the Suppression of Popery". University of Minnesota Law School. Archived from the original on 25 January 2010. Retrieved 23 January 2009.
^ Dickson, David (1997). Arctic Ireland: The Extraordinary Story of the Great Frost and Forgotten Famine of 1740 41. Belfast: White Row Press. ISBN 978-1-870132-85-5.
^ a b c   Gr da, Cormac (1989). The Great Irish Famine. Cambridge University Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-521-55266-0.
^ a b Clarkson, Leslie; Crawford, Margaret (2001). Feast and Famine: Food and Nutrition in Ireland, 1500 1920. Oxford University Press. p. 274. ISBN 978-0-19-822751-9.
^ a b Ward, Alan J. (1994). The Irish Constitutional Tradition: Responsible Government and Modern Ireland, 1782 1992. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-8132-0784-1.
^ "Ireland AD 1750 1900 The Industrial Age". WorldTimelines.org.uk. The British Museum. Archived from the original on 26 December 2010. Retrieved 28 March 2010.
^ O'Grada, Cormac (1994). Ireland: A New Economic History, 1780 1939. Oxford University Press. pp. 314 330. ISBN 978-0-19-820598-2. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
^ Keating, Paul; Desmond, Derry (1993). Culture and Capitalism in Contemporary Ireland. Hampshire, UK: Avebury Press. p. 119. ISBN 978-1-85628-362-5.
^ Jacobsen, John (1994). Chasing Progress in the Irish Republic. Cambridge University Press. p. 47.
^ Mokyr, Joel (1983). Why Ireland Starved: A Quantitative and Analytical History of the Irish Economy, 1800 1850. Oxon: Taylor and Francis. p. 152.
^ "The Irish Potato Famine". Digital History. University of Houston. 7 November 2008. Archived from the original on 23 February 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2008.
^ "Effects of the Famine: Emigration". wesleyjohnston.com. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019.
^ Vallely, Paul (25 April 2006). "1841: A window on Victorian Britain   This Britain". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 17 June 2015. Retrieved 16 April 2009.
^ Quinn, Eamon (19 August 2007). "Ireland Learns to Adapt to a Population Growth Spurt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 8 November 2008.
^ Kee, Robert (1972). The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. pp. 376 400. ISBN 978-0-297-17987-0.
^ a b Kee, Robert (1972). The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. pp. 478 530. ISBN 978-0-297-17987-0.
^ a b c Morough, Michael (December 2000). "The Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921". History Review (38): 34 36.
^ Kee, Robert (1972). The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. pp. 719 748. ISBN 978-0-297-17987-0.
^ Gwynn, Stephen (January 1934). "Ireland Since the Treaty". Foreign Affairs. 12 (2): 322. doi:10.2307/20030588. JSTOR 20030588.
^ Connolly, Kevin (1 June 2004). "Irish who fought on the beaches". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 8 November 2008.
^ a b Hull, Mark: "The Irish Interlude: German Intelligence in Ireland, 1939 1943", Journal of Military History, Vol. 66, No. 3 (July 2002), pp. 695 717
^ Carroll, Joseph T. (2002). Ireland in the War Years 1939 1945. San Francisco: International Scholars Publishers. p. 190. ISBN 978-1-57309-185-5.
^ Clancy, Patrick; Drudy, Sheelagh; Lynch, Kathleen; O'Dowd, Liam (1997). Irish Society: Sociological Perspectives. Institute of Public Administration. pp. 68 70. ISBN 978-1-872002-87-3.
^ Schmied, Doris (2005). Winning and Losing: the Changing Geography of Europe's Rural Areas. Chippenham, UK: Ashgate. p. 234. ISBN 978-0-7546-4101-8.
^ The Future of International Migration to OECD Countries. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2009. p. 67. ISBN 978-92-64-04449-4. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
^ R. F. Foster, Luck and the Irish: A Brief History of Change 1970 2000 (2007), pp 7 36
^ Foster, Luck and the Irish pp 37 66.
^ Pogatchnik, Shawn (25 March 2010). "Ireland's Economy Suffered Record Slump in 2009". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on 8 February 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2010.
^ "Measuring Ireland's Progress 2011" (PDF). CSO.ie. Central Statistics Office. October 2012. p. 36. ISSN 1649-6728. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
^ Whyte, John (1983). "How much discrimination was there under the Unionist regime, 1921 1968?".  In Gallagher, Tom; O'Connell, James (eds.). Contemporary Irish Studies. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-0919-7. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 30 April 2019   via Conflict Archive on the Internet.
^ Northern Ireland Office (1988). Fair Employment in Northern Ireland. Her Majesty's Stationery Office. ISBN 0-10-103802-X. Archived from the original on 4 January 2012. Retrieved 23 October 2008   via Conflict Archive on the Internet.
^ "'We Shall Overcome' ... The History of the Struggle for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland 1968 1978". Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association. 1978. Archived from the original on 31 May 2011. Retrieved 23 October 2008   via Conflict Archive on the Internet.
^ Taylor, Peter (1997). Provos: The IRA and Sinn F in. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. pp. 33 56. ISBN 978-0-7475-3392-4.
^ Taylor, Peter (1997). Provos: The IRA and Sinn F in. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. pp. 56 100. ISBN 978-0-7475-3392-4.
^ "Turning the pages on lost lives". BBC News. 8 October 1999. Archived from the original on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
^ Nieminen, Tauno; de Chastelain, John; Andrew D. Sens. "Independent International Commission on Decommissioning" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 March 2011. Retrieved 15 October 2008.
^ "Queen and Martin McGuinness shake hands". BBC News. 27 June 2012. Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2021.
^ "Country Comparison: GDP  per capita (PPP)". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 19 November 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
^ "Human Development Report 2015: Table A1.1" (PDF). Human Development Index and its components. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2015. p. 47. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 March 2017. Retrieved 30 November 2016   via Jewish Virtual Library.
^ Ritchie, Heather; Ellis, Geraint (2009). Across the waters (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2011. Retrieved 14 September 2010.
^ "Area and Land Mass". Ordnance Survey of Ireland. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 18 November 2013.
^ "Ireland Facts, Ireland Flag". NationalGeographic.com. National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 28 June 2017.
^ "Guardian Style Guide". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2 June 2014. British Isles: A geographical term taken to mean Great Britain, Ireland and some or all of the adjacent islands such as Orkney, Shetland and the Isle of Man. The phrase is best avoided, given its (understandable) unpopularity in the Irish Republic. Alternatives adopted by some publications are British and Irish Isles or simply Britain and Ireland
^ a b "FAQ: What is the longest river in Ireland?". Ordnance Survey Ireland. Archived from the original on 29 September 2015. Retrieved 30 May 2014.
^ Meally, Victor (1968). Encyclopaedia of Ireland. Dublin: Allen Figgis & Co. p. 240.
^ "Landscape of the River". Inland Waterways Association of Ireland. 2014. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 30 May 2014.
^ "Geology of Ireland". Geology for Everyone. Geological Survey of Ireland. Archived from the original on 27 March 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2008.
^ "Bedrock Geology of Ireland" (PDF). Geology for Everyone. Geological Survey of Ireland. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 October 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2008.
^ "Geology of Kerry-Cork   Sheet 21". Maps. Geological Survey of Ireland. 2007. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. Retrieved 9 November 2008.
^ Karst Working Group (2000). "The Burren". The Karst of Ireland: Limestone Landscapes, Caves and Groundwater Drainage System. Geological Survey of Ireland. Archived from the original on 18 October 2009. Retrieved 5 November 2008.
^ "Ireland: North West Europe". EnergyFiles.com. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
^ Shannon, Pat; Haughton, P. D. W.; Corcoran, D. V. (2001). The Petroleum Exploration of Ireland's Offshore Basins. London: Geological Society. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-4237-1163-6.
^ "Providence sees Helvick oil field as key site in Celtic Sea". Irish Examiner. 17 July 2000. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2008.
^ "Climate of Ireland". Climate. Met  ireann. Archived from the original on 9 February 2010. Retrieved 11 November 2008.
^ "Rainfall". Climate. Met  ireann. Archived from the original on 2 June 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2008.
^ Keane, Kevin (28 December 2010). "Sub-zero temperatures make 2010 a record-breaking year". Irish Independent. Archived from the original on 9 March 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
^ "Irish Weather Extremes". Met  ireann. Archived from the original on 16 December 2016. Retrieved 15 December 2016.
^ Dan Griffin (2 November 2015). "Balmy start to November sees record temperatures". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
^ Costello, M.J. and Kelly, K.S., 1993 Biogeography of Ireland: past, present and future Irish Biogeographic Society Occasional Publications Number 2
^ "Land cover and land use". Environmental Assessment. Wexford: Environmental Protection Agency [Ireland]. 2011. Archived from the original on 16 September 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2011.
^ M Lehane; O Le Bolloch; P Crawley (eds.). "Environment in Focus 2002: Key Environmental Indicators for Ireland" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2016.
^ "Ireland now has the 'second-smallest' forest area in Europe". The Journal. 30 August 2012. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
^ Forestry in the EU and the world, Eurostat, 2011, ISBN 978-92-79-19988-2, archived from the original on 4 September 2015, retrieved 30 August 2015
^ Native Species. Tree Council of Ireland.
^ Hackney, Paul. "Spartina Anglica". Invasive Alien Species in Northern Ireland. National Museums Northern Ireland. Archived from the original on 19 May 2011. Retrieved 1 January 2009.
^ Guiry, M. D.; Nic Dhonncha, E. N. (2001). "The Marine Macroalgae of Ireland: Biodiversity and Distribution in Marine Biodiversity in Ireland and Adjacent Waters". Proceedings of a Conference 26 27 April 2001 (Publication No. 8).
^ Minchin, D. (2001). "Biodiversity and Marine Invaders". Proceedings of a Conference 26 27 April 2001 (Publication No. 8).
^ "Biodiversity". Clare County Council. Archived from the original on 28 June 2010. Retrieved 26 March 2010.
^ "Otter Lutra Lutra" (PDF). Northern Ireland Species Action Plan. Environment and Heritage Service. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2011. Retrieved 1 January 2010.
^ "CAP Reform   A Long-term Perspective for Sustainable Agriculture". Agriculture and Rural Development. European Commission. Archived from the original on 22 December 2009. Retrieved 30 July 2007.
^ "Climate Change Causes". Environmental Protection Agency (Ireland). 2014. Archived from the original on 15 December 2017. Retrieved 4 December 2017.
^ Roche, Dick (8 November 2006). National Parks. Vol. 185. Seanad  ireann. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 30 July 2007. Seanad Debate involving Former Minister for Environment Heritage and Local Government
^ a b McKittrick, David (19 December 2002). "Census Reveals Northern Ireland's Protestant Population is at Record Low". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 24 June 2011. Retrieved 30 December 2009.
^ Counihan, Patrick (30 March 2012). "Divorce rates soar in Ireland as population continues to expand". Irish Central. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2014.
^ Crawford, John (1993). Anglicizing the Government of Ireland: The Irish Privy Council and the Expansion of Tudor Rule 1556 1578. Irish Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-7165-2498-4.
^ "The Gazetteer of British Place Names: Main features of the Gazetteer". Gazetteer of British Place Names. Association of British Counties. Archived from the original on 11 January 2010. Retrieved 23 January 2010.
^ "NI by County". Discover Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland Tourist Board. Archived from the original on 23 October 2010. Retrieved 15 October 2010.
^ "Chapter 2: Geographical distribution" (PDF). Central Statistics Office. 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2020.
^ a b "Statistical Classification and Delineation of Settlements" (PDF). Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (NISRA). February 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 April 2014.
^ a b c d "Census 2016 Summary Results   Part 1". CSO.ie. Central Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 25 September 2017.
^ "The City of Lisburn Facts and Figures 2009/2010" (PDF). lisburncity.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 November 2010. Retrieved 12 February 2019.
^ "Ethnic origins, 2006 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories   20% sample data Archived 18 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Statistics Canada.
^ McDonald, Ronan (16 March 2015). "Has Australia forgotten its Irish past?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 31 January 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019.
^ "Rank of States for Selected Ancestry Groups with 100,000 or more persons: 1980" (PDF). United States Census Bureau. Retrieved 30 November 2012.
^ Kliff, Sarah (17 March 2013). "The Irish-American population is seven times larger than Ireland". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 April 2016. Retrieved 6 August 2014.
^ Sullivan, Kevin (24 October 2007). "Hustling to Find Classrooms For All in a Diverse Ireland". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 9 November 2008.
^ Tovey, Hilary; Share, Perry (2003). A Sociology of Ireland. Dublin: Gill & Macmillan. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-7171-3501-1. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2011.
^ Seaver, Michael (5 September 2007). "Ireland Steps Up as Immigration Leader". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 8 March 2009. Retrieved 30 December 2009.
^ "24% of boom births to 'new Irish'". Irish Examiner. 28 June 2011. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013. Retrieved 9 December 2012.
^ Henry, McDonald (5 April 2009). "Ireland's Age of Affluence Comes to an End". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2009.
^ "Head-to-Head: The Irish Language Debate". UniversityTimes.ie. 21 February 2011. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2015.
^   Broin, Brian (16 January 2010). "Schism fears for Gaeilgeoir ". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
^ John Walsh; Bernadette O Rourke; Hugh Rowland, Research Report on New Speakers of Irish: https://www.forasnagaeilge.ie/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/New-speakers-of-Irish-report.pdf
^ "Press Statement: Census 2011 Results" (PDF). CSO.ie. Dublin: Central Statistics Office. 22 November 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 6 October 2017.
^   Broin, Brian. "Schism fears for Gaeilgeoir ". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2015.
^ "Where are Ireland's Gaeltacht areas?". FAQ.  dar s na Gaeltachta. 2015. Archived from the original on 7 September 2015. Retrieved 9 September 2015.
^ Spolsky, Bernard (2004). Language policy. Cambridge University Press. p. 191. ISBN 978-0-521-01175-4.
^ "Table 15: Irish speakers aged 3 years and over in each Province, County and City, classified by frequency of speaking Irish, 2006". Census 2006. Central Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 27 February 2009. Retrieved 9 November 2008.
^ "Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 1999". Access Research Knowledge Northern Ireland (Queen's University Belfast / Ulster University). 9 May 2003. Archived from the original on 8 January 2011. Retrieved 20 October 2013.
^ McArthur, Tom, ed. (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-214183-5.
^ "Tionchar na gCeilteach". BBC News. 23 May 2009. Archived from the original on 16 April 2012. Retrieved 23 January 2010.
^ "Stair na Taibhdheirce". An Taibhdheirce. 2014. Archived from the original on 29 May 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2014.
^ "An Taibhdhearc". Fodor's. Archived from the original on 2 October 2014. Retrieved 4 October 2014.
^ Houston, Eugenie (2001). Working and Living in Ireland. Working and Living Publications. p. 253. ISBN 978-0-9536896-8-2.
^ "What is Bloomsday?". James Joyce Centre. Archived from the original on 16 September 2014. Retrieved 4 October 2014.
^ Higgins Wyndham, Andrew (2006). Re-imagining Ireland. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
^ O'Dwyer, Simon: Prehistoric Music in Ireland (Stroud, Gloucestershire: Tempus Publishing, 2004), ISBN 0-7524-3129-3.
^ Brannon, Patrick V.: "Medieval Ireland: Music in Cathedral, Church and Cloister", in: Early Music 28.2 (May 2000), p. 193.
^ Buckley, Ann: "Medieval Ireland, Music in", in: The Encyclopaedia of Music in Ireland, ed. by Harry White and Barra Boydell (Dublin: UCD Press, 2013), ISBN 978-1-906359-78-2, p. 659.
^ Geraghty, Des (1994). Luke Kelly: A Memoir. Basement Press. pp. 26 30. ISBN 978-1-85594-090-1.
^ O'Kelly, Michael J.; O'Kelly, Claire (1982). Newgrange: Archaeology Art and Legend. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-27371-5.
^ Reville, William (14 December 2000). "Ireland's Scientific Heritage" (PDF). Understanding Science: Famous Irish Scientists. University College Cork, Faculty of Science. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
^ Waller, Professor I. (1951). "Nobel Prize in Physics 1951   Presentation Speech". NobelPrize.org. Alfred Nobel Memorial Foundation. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
^ McCartney, Mark (1 December 2002). "William Thomson: king of Victorian physics". Physics World. Archived from the original on 15 July 2008. Retrieved 22 November 2008.(subscription required)
^ "John Bell: Belfast street named after physicist who proved Einstein wrong". BBC News. 19 February 2015. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
^ "Five Irish Scientists Who Put Chemistry on the Map". Science.ie. Science Foundation Ireland. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 24 November 2016.
^ Global Innovation Index 2022, 15th Edition. WIPO. Global Innovation Index. World Intellectual Property Organization. 2022. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. ISBN 9789280534320. Retrieved 16 November 2022.
^ "Global Innovation Index 2019". World Intellectual Property Organization. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ a b "The Social Significance of Sport" (PDF). Economic and Social Research Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2008.
^ "Initiative's latest ViewerTrack study shows that in Ireland GAA and soccer still dominate the sporting arena, while globally the Superbowl (sic) was the most watched sporting event of 2005". FinFacts.com. Finfacts Multimedia. 4 January 2006. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2010.
^ "Soccer in Northern Ireland". Culture Northern Ireland. Derry/Londonderry: Nerve Centre. 14 July 2008. Archived from the original on 16 October 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2011.
^ "Sports Participation and Health Among Adults in Ireland" (PDF). Economic and Social Research Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 15 October 2008.
^ "Croke Park. Not just a venue. A destination". Croke Park Stadium / Gaelic Athletic Association. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
^ Moynihan, Michael (6 February 2007). "For First Time, Croke Park Is Ireland's Common Ground". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2008.
^ "FAI History: 1921 1930". Football Association of Ireland. 5 June 2009. Archived from the original on 2 October 2017. Retrieved 30 December 2009.
^ a b c "Champions of Europe". ERCRugby.com. European Club Rugby. 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 4 October 2014.
^ "Munster 23 19 Biarritz". BBC News. 20 May 2006. Archived from the original on 24 October 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2011.
^ "Six Nations roll of honour". BBC News. 2014. Archived from the original on 8 November 2015. Retrieved 28 May 2014.
^ "RT  News: Irish boxer loses out on Olympic gold". RT  News. Raidi  Teilif s  ireann. 28 August 2008. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 28 February 2010.
^ "Katie Taylor wins World Boxing Championships". RT  Sport. Raidi  Teilif s  ireann. 18 September 2010. Archived from the original on 23 September 2012. Retrieved 20 September 2010.
^ "Tokyo 2020: Kellie Harrington lands lightweight Olympic gold after dominant display". RT  News. 8 August 2021. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2021.
^ FGS Consulting (May 2009). Review of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (PDF) (Report). Department of Arts, Sport and Tourism. p. 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 29 March 2010.
^ "Kildare at the heart of the Irish bloodstock industry". The Curragh Racecourse. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 29 March 2010.
^ "Loughnane claims silver medal in Berlin". RT . 16 August 2009. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021.
^ "Golfing in Ireland". Ireland.com. Tourism Ireland. Archived from the original on 29 May 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2014.
^ "2006 Ryder Cup Team Europe". PGA of America, Ryder Cup Limited, and Turner Sports Interactive. 23 January 2006. Archived from the original on 19 November 2008. Retrieved 8 November 2008.
^ Brennan, S amus (22 July 2007). "S amus Brennan, Minister for Arts, Sport and Tourism comments on victory by Padraig Harrington in the 2007 British Open Golf Championship". arts-sport-tourism.gov.ie. Dublin: Department of Arts, Sport and Tourism. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 8 November 2008.
^ "Peter Dawson speaks about golf's Olympic ambition". OpenGolf.com. R&A Championships Ltd. 16 December 2009. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2010.
^ "In Pictures: Harrington wins US PGA". RT  News. 11 August 2008. Archived from the original on 2 November 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2008.
^ McDaid, Brendan (9 June 2004). "Shipwrecks ahoy in area". Belfast Telegraph. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2010.
^ "Fishing in Ireland". Central and Regional Fisheries Boards. Archived from the original on 14 March 2010. Retrieved 26 March 2010.
^ "Sea Fishing in Ireland". Central and Regional Fisheries Boards. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Retrieved 26 March 2010.
^ a b c d e f Davidson, Alan; Jaine, Tom (2006). The Oxford Companion to Food. Oxford University Press. pp. 407 408. ISBN 978-0-19-280681-9.
^ Salaman, Redcliffe Nathan; Burton, William Glynn; Hawkes, John Gregory (1985). The History and Social Influence of the Potato. Cambridge University Press. pp. 218 219.
^ Garrow, John (March 2002). "Feast and Famine: a History of Food and Nutrition in Ireland 1500 1920". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 95 (3): 160 161. doi:10.1177/014107680209500320. ISSN 1758-1095. PMC 1279494.
^ Albertson, Elizabeth (2009). Ireland for Dummies. Hoboken: Wiley Publishing. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-470-10572-6.
^ Davenport, Fionn (2008). Ireland. London: Lonely Planet. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-74104-696-0.
^ Davenport, Fionn; Smith, Jonathan (2006). Dublin. London: Lonely Planet. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-74104-710-3.
^ McCormack, W. J. (2001). The Blackwell Companion to Modern Irish Culture. Oxford: Blackwell. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-631-16525-5.
^ Leavy, Brian; Wilson, David (1994). Strategy and Leadership. London: Routledge. p. 63. ISBN 9780415070911.
^ O'Clery, Conor (25 February 2009). "Whiskey Resists the Downturn". GlobalPost. Public Radio International (PRI). Archived from the original on 3 January 2016. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
^ Blocker, Jack; Fahey, David; Tyrrell, Ian (2003). Alcohol and Temperance in Modern History. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. p. 653. ISBN 978-1-57607-833-4.
^ a b Berk, Christina (19 March 2009). "Irish Whiskey's Growth Not Just About Luck". CNBC. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2010.
^ Davenport, Fionn (2010). Discover Ireland. London: Lonely Planet. p. 348. ISBN 978-1-74179-998-9. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
^ a b "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". IMF. Retrieved 9 February 2023.
^ a b "Eurostat Regional GDP". Eurostat. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 12 April 2016.
^ "National Competitiveness Council Submission on the National Development Plan 2007 2013" (PDF). National Competitiveness Council. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 October 2008. Retrieved 28 October 2016.
^ a b c "County Incomes and Regional GDP 2018". Central Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2021.
^ a b c d e "Regional GDP GDP per capita in the EU in 2011: seven capital regions among the ten most prosperous". Europa.eu. European Commission. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 10 May 2015.
^ Kinealy, Christine (1998). "Peel, rotten potatoes, and providence: the repeal of the Corn Laws and the irish Famine".  In Marrison, Andrew (ed.). Freedom and Trade: Free trade and its reception, 1815 1960. Free trade and its reception 1815 1960 : freedom and trade. Vol. 1. London: Psychology Press. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-415-15527-4. Archived from the original on 22 May 2020. Retrieved 17 August 2019. All agricultural produce in Ireland [in the early-19th century], in fact, outperformed that of other European countries (it was twice that of France, for example).
^ Battersby, Thomas Stephenson Francis (1912). Sixty Points Against Home Rule: A "modern-eye"-opener. Unionist assoc. of Ireland. p. 7. Archived from the original on 22 May 2020. Retrieved 17 August 2019. It was inevitable [...] that the depression of agriculture which followed the repeal should fall with greater severity on Ireland than on Great Britain.
^ "World Heritage List". World Heritage. UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 23 August 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
^ "Ireland: Tentative Lists". World Heritage. UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 1 September 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
^ "Mount Stewart's world-class gardens Archived 10 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine". National Trust. Retrieved 9 December 2017
^ a b c d "Tourism Facts 2006". F ilte Ireland. National Tourism Development Authority. 2006. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
^ National Monuments Service. "Search by County". National Monuments. Department of Environment, Heritage and Local Government. Archived from the original on 20 February 2010. Retrieved 1 January 2010.
^ "About SEMO: The Single Electricity Market". Single Electricity Market Operator (SEMO). Archived from the original on 30 November 2010. Retrieved 13 January 2011.
^ "Interconnection". Commission for Energy Regulation. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 30 March 2010.
^ "Interconnection: East-West Interconnector". EirGrid. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2016.
^ "Bord G is Marks Completion of South-North Pipeline". Bord G is. 1 November 2007. Archived from the original on 29 May 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
^ "Northern Ireland Energy Holdings   Frequently Asked Questions". Northern Ireland Energy Holdings. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 8 May 2009.
^ Gas Capacity Statement 2007, Commission for Energy Regulation, pp. 22, 24, 26, archived from the original on 5 March 2012, retrieved 8 May 2009
^ "2014 Global Green Economy Index" (PDF). Dual Citizen LLC. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2014.
^ "Options For Future Renewable Energy Policy, Targets And Programmes issued by Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources" (PDF). Hibernian Wind Power Ltd. 27 February 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 March 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2008.
Bibliography
Arnold, Bruce (1977). Irish Art: A Concise History. London: Thames & Hudson. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-500-20148-0.
Beckett, J.C. The making of Modern Ireland 1603-1923 (1971).
Becker, Annette; Wang, Wilfried (1997). 20th-century Architecture: Ireland. Munich: Prestel. p. 198. ISBN 978-3-7913-1719-9.
Bew, Paul. Ireland: The Politics of Enmity 1789-2006 (2007).
Collins, Neil; Cradden, Terry (2001). Irish Politics Today. Manchester University Press. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-7190-6174-5. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
Daly, Mary E. Sixties Ireland: reshaping the economy, state and society, 1957 1973 (Cambridge University Press, 2016).
Dennison, Gabriel; Ni Fhloinn, Baibre (1994). Traditional Architecture in Ireland. Dublin: Environmental Institute, University College Dublin. p. 94. ISBN 978-1-898473-09-1.
Dooney, Sean; O'Toole, John (1992). Irish Government Today. Dublin: Gill and Macmillan. p. 247. ISBN 978-0-7171-1703-1.
Ellis, Steven G. (1921). The Story of the Irish Race: A Popular History of Ireland. Ireland: The Irish Publishing Co. p. 768. ISBN 978-0-517-06408-5. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
Ferriter, Diarmaid. "Women and political change in Ireland since 1960."  ire-Ireland 43.1 (2008): 179 204.
Foster, Robert Fitzroy (1988). Modern Ireland, 1600 1972. Penguin Books. p. 688. ISBN 978-0-7139-9010-2.
Foster, R. F.  Luck and the Irish: A Brief History of Change 1970-2000 (2007) excerpt Archived 30 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine
Herm, Gerhard (2002). The Celts. Ireland: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-31343-2.
O'Croinin, Daibhi (2005). Prehistoric and Early Ireland. Oxford University Press. p. 1219. ISBN 978-0-19-821737-4. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
  Gr da, Cormac (1997). A Rocky Road: The Irish Economy Since the 1920s. Manchester University Press. p. 246. ISBN 978-0-7190-4584-4. Archived from the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
Oppenheimer, Stephen (2006). Origins of the British: A Genetic Detective Story. New York: Carroll & Graf. p. 534. ISBN 978-0-7867-1890-0.
O'Rahilly, T. F. (1947). Early Irish History and Mythology. Medieval Academy of America.
Woodcock, N. H.; Strachan, Robin A. (2000). Geological History of Britain and Ireland. Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell Publishing. p. 423. ISBN 978-0-632-03656-1. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
Wallis, Geoff; Wilson, Sue (2001). The Rough Guide to Irish Music. Rough Guides. p. 599. ISBN 978-1-85828-642-6.
External links
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Republic of Ireland.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Northern Ireland.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Ireland.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ireland.
 Wikimedia Atlas of Ireland
Government of Ireland
Northern Ireland Executive
vteIreland topics
Republic of Ireland topics
Northern Ireland topics
HistoryTimeline
Prehistory
Protohistory
Early history
Gaelic Ireland / Lordship of Ireland
800 1169
1169 1536
Kingdom of Ireland
1536 1691
1691 1800
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
1801 1923
Irish Republic
Southern Ireland (1921 1922)
Northern Ireland (1921 present)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
since 1922
Irish Free State (1922 1937)
Ireland (since 1922)
Events
Battles of Tara / Glenmama / Clontarf
Norman invasion
Bruce campaign
Black Death
Tudor conquest
Desmond Rebellions
Spanish Armada
Tyrone's Rebellion
Flight of the Earls
Plantation of Ulster
1641 Rebellion / Confederate War
Cromwellian conquest / Settlement of 1652
Williamite War
Penal Laws
First Great Famine
1798 Rebellion
Act of Union (1800)
1803 Rebellion
Tithe War
Second Great Famine
Land War
Fenian Rising
Dublin lock-out
Home Rule crisis
Easter Rising
War of Independence
Anglo-Irish Treaty
Civil War
The Emergency
IRA Northern Campaign
IRA Border Campaign
The Troubles
Peace process
Economy of the Republic of Ireland
Celtic Tiger
Post-2008 Irish economic downturn
Post-2008 Irish banking crisis
Other topics
List of conflicts in Ireland
List of Irish tribes
List of Irish kingdoms
List of High Kings
Gaelic clothing and fashion
List of World Heritage Sites in the Republic of Ireland
GeographyNatural
Climate
Climate change
Coastline
Extreme points
Fauna
Islands
Loughs
Mountains
Rivers
list
List of national parks of the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland
Human
Architecture
Notable buildings
Tallest buildings and structures
Cities
Counties
Demographics of the Republic of Ireland / of Northern Ireland
Ports
Provinces
ROI UK border
Towns
Tourist attractions
Transport
PoliticsIdeologies
Nationalism
Republicanism
Ulster loyalism
Unionism
Republic of Ireland
Constitution
Economy
Education
Foreign relations
Government
local
Oireachtas parliament
D il  ireann (lower house)
Seanad  ireann (upper house)
President
Northern Ireland
Assembly
D'Hondt method
Economy
Education
Government
local
Peace process
CultureCuisineFood
List of dishes
Barmbrack
Bacon and cabbage
Boxty
Champ
Coddle
Colcannon
Drisheen
Irish fry
Skirts and kidneys
Soda bread
Spice Bag
Stew
Drinks
Coffee
Cream
Guinness
Mist
Poit n
Tea
Whiskey
Dance
Jig
Sean-n s
Set dancing
Stepdance
Festivals
Imbolc
Saint Patrick's Day
Bealtaine
The Twelfth
L nasa
Rose of Tralee
Samhain / Halloween
Wren Day
Languages
Hiberno-English
Irish
Shelta
Ulster Scots
Literature
Annals
Fiction
Gaeilge
Poetry
Theatre
Triads
Music
Ballads
C il 
Folk music
session
Instruments
Rock music
Traditional singing
Mythology
Cycles
Fenian
Mythological
Ulster
Aos S 
Echtrai
Immrama
Tuatha D  Danann
Legendary creatures
People
Anglo-Irish
Gaels
Gaelic Ireland
Hiberno-Normans
Irish diaspora
List of Irish people
Travellers
Ulster Scots
Sport
Association football in the Republic of Ireland
Association football in Northern Ireland
Camogie
Gaelic football
Gaelic handball
Hurling
Martial arts
Road bowling
Rounders
Rugby union
Symbols
Brighid's Cross
Cl irseach
County coats of arms
Flags
N. Ireland flags issue
Irish Wolfhound
National coat of arms
Red Hand
Shamrock
Other
Calendar
Castles
Cinema
Heritage Sites
Historic houses
Homelessness
Monastic
Names
Place names / outside Ireland
Prostitution (Republic) / in Northern Ireland
Public holidays in the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland
Public houses
Squatting
 Ireland portal
vteCeltic nationsNationsCeltic League definition
Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales
Other claimants
North Region, Portugal
Nova Scotia
Padania
Prince Edward Island
Asturias
Galicia
Y Wladfa
Gaul
Merseyside
Nationalism
Brittany (history)
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland (national identity)
Wales (national identity)
Independence
Irish
United Ireland
Scottish
Welsh
Republicanism
Irish
Scottish
Welsh
Pan-Celtic movements
Celtic Congress
Celtic League
Celtic union
Columba Project
Languages
Brittonic
Breton
Cornish
Welsh
Goidelic
Irish
Manx
Scottish Gaelic
Mixed
Bungi Creole
Shelta
Peoples
Britons
Bretons
Cornish
Welsh
Gaels
Irish (including Irish Travellers)
Manx
Scots (including Scottish Travellers
Culture
Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales
Celtic art
Celtic religion
Festivals
Festival Interceltique de Lorient
Pan Celtic Festival
Hebridean Celtic Festival
Celtic Connections
Celtic Media Festival
Eisteddfod
Sport
Bando
Bataireacht
Camogie
Cammag
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cornish wrestling
Curling
Gaelic football (Ladies')
Gaelic handball
Gouren
Rounders
Highland games
Hurling
Road bowls
Shinty
Welsh handball
vteBritish Isles
Terminology
Alba
Albion
Prydain
Britain
 ire
Hibernia
Naming dispute
PoliticsSovereign states
Ireland
United Kingdom (England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales)
Crown Dependencies
Bailiwick of Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Political cooperation
Ireland United Kingdom relations
British Irish Council
British Irish Intergovernmental Conference
British Irish Parliamentary Assembly
Common Travel Area
GeographyIsland groups
Channel Islands
Islands of the Clyde
Great Britain
Hebrides
Inner
Outer
Ireland
Isle of Man
Northern Isles
Orkney
Shetland
Isles of Scilly
Lists of islands of
Bailiwick of Guernsey
Ireland
Bailiwick of Jersey
Isle of Man
United Kingdom
England
Scotland
Wales
History(outline)Island groups
Ireland
Current states
Ireland
United Kingdom
England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Former states
Irish Free State
Kingdom of England
Principality of Wales
Kingdom of Great Britain
Kingdom of Ireland
Kingdom of Scotland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
SocietyModern languagesGermanic
English
Scots
Celtic
Cornish
Scottish Gaelic
Irish
Manx
Welsh
Romance
Auregnais
French
Guern siais
J rriais
Sercquiais
Other
British Sign Language
Irish Sign Language
Northern Ireland Sign Language
Shelta
People
British
Cornish
English
English Gypsies
Irish
Irish Travellers
Kale
Manx
Northern Irish
Scottish
Ulster-Scots
Welsh
Authority control National
Germany
United States
Geographic
MusicBrainz area
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ireland&oldid=1147110882"