Culinary traditions of Afghanistan
This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Too many bullet points like a list, instead of sentences and paragraphs. Also needs better organization between 'Staple foods', 'Drinks' etc. Needs more encyclopedic content instead of current catalog-like format. Please help improve this article if you can. (November 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series on theCulture of Afghanistan
History
People
Languages
Traditions
Buzkashi
Clothing
Loya jirga
Pashtunwali
Wedding
Mythology
Cuisine
Festivals
Religion
Art
Architecture
Sculpture
Painting
Literature
Afghan poetry
Afghan proverbs
Music and Performing arts
Theater
Media
Television
Cinema
Sport
Monuments
World Heritage Sites
Symbols
Flag
Coat of arms
National anthem
 Afghanistan portalvte
Afghan cuisine (Pashto:    , romanized: Afghan Pakhlai, Dari:    , romanized: shpazi-e Afgh ni) is influenced to a certain extent by Persian, Central Asian and Indian cuisines due to Afghanistan's close proximity and cultural ties.[1][2] The cuisine is halal and mainly based on mutton, beef, poultry and fish with rice and Afghan bread. Accompanying these are common vegetables and dairy products, such as milk, yogurt, whey, etc.,[3] and fresh and dried fruits such as apples, apricots, grapes, bananas, oranges, plums, pomegranates, sweet melons, raisins, etc.[4] The diet of most Afghans revolve around rice-based dishes, while various forms of naan is consumed with most meals.[5] Tea is generally consumed daily in large quantities, and is a major part of hospitality.[6] The culinary specialties reflect the nation's ethnic and geographic diversity. The national dish of Afghanistan is Qabili Palau, a rice dish cooked with raisins, carrots, nuts and lamb or beef.[7]
Background[edit]
 Location of Afghanistan in Asia
The cuisine of Afghanistan is halal and has elements from various places, for example garam masala from India, coriander and mint from Iran, dumplings and noodles from Uzbekistan and Xinjiang in China, and baklava from Turkey.[8][9] The similarities can be seen in the use of spices like cumin and cinnamon (as in Indian cuisine), green cardamom flavors (as in Chinese tea), and kebabs and yoghurts (as in Turkish and Arab cuisines).[10]
Staple foods[edit]
Rice[edit]
 Afghan Qabeli palaw
 Rice with kofta (meatballs) and corn
Rice is a core staple food in Afghan cuisine and the most important part of any meal.[9] Biryani is one of the lesser popular rice dishes in Afghanistan. It is consumed mostly in cities closer to neighboring Pakistan, such as Kandahar, Jalalabad and Khost. Challow, or white rice cooked with mild spices,[11] is served mainly with qormas (korma: stews or casseroles). Palaw is cooked similarly to challow, but a combination of meat, stock, qorma, and herbs are also mixed in before baking, resulting in the elaborate colors, flavors, and aromas from which the rice got its name. Sometimes caramelized sugar is used to give the rice a rich brown color. Examples of palaw include:
Kabuli palaw (the national dish[7])   meat and stock are added, plus a topping of fried raisins, slivered carrots, and pistachios
Yakhni palaw   meat and stock are added to give the rice a brown color
Zamarod palaw   spinach qorma is mixed in before the baking process, hence zamarod, meaning "emerald"
Bore palaw   lawand is added giving the rice a yellow color
Landi palaw   a traditional meal of rice (with stock made from chicken or mutton that has been salted and dried in the sun)
Bonjan-e-roomi palaw   bonjan-e-roomi (tomato qorma) is added during baking giving the rice a red color
Serkah palaw   similar to yakhni pulao, but with vinegar and other spices
Shibet palaw   fresh dill and raisins are added during baking
Narenj palaw   a sweet elaborate rice dish made with saffron, orange peel, pistachios, almonds, and chicken
Maash palaw   a strictly vegetarian sweet-and-sour pilaf baked with mung beans, apricots, and bulgur wheat
Alou balou palaw   a sweet rice dish with plums and chicken
Afghan bread[edit]
This section is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (February 2022)
 Naan (bread) from a local baker, the most widely consumed bread in Afghanistan
Afghan bread is flat and cooked in a tanoor or tandoor (a vertical ground clay oven). The bread is slapped onto a stone wall to cook. Tabakhai is a flatbread cooked on a flat upside-down pan.
Major dishes[edit]
Steamed dumplings[edit]
 Mantu in a steamer before cooking
 Afghan aushak
There is a wide variety of dumplings. Known under the name khameerbob and often eaten as dumplings, these native dishes are popular. Due to the long time required to make the dough for the dumplings, they are rarely served at large gatherings, such as weddings. They are instead served on special occasions at home.[citation needed]
Aushak   dumplings filled with a mixture consisting mainly of leeks, topped with either garlic-mint qoroot or a garlic yogurt sauce, saut ed tomatoes, red kidney beans, and a well-seasoned ground-meat mixture (It is a dish associated with Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan.)
Mantu   steamed dumplings filled with onion and ground beef or lamb, usually topped with a tomato- and yogurt- or qoroot-based sauce and then garnished with dried mint and coriander (The yogurt-based topping is usually a mixture of yogurt, garlic, and split chickpeas. The qoroot-based sauce is made of goat's cheese and also mixed with garlic; a qoroot and yogurt mixture will sometimes be used.)
Qormah[edit]
This section is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (February 2022)
Qormah (also spelled "korma" or "qorma") is an onion- and tomato-based stew or casserole usually served with challow rice.[3] First, onion is caramelized, for a richly colored stew. Then tomato is added, along with a variety of fruits, spices, and vegetables, depending on the recipe. The main ingredient, which can be meat or other vegetables, is added last. There are hundreds of different types of qormahs including:
Qormah e gosht (meat qormah)   usually the main qormah served with palaw at gatherings
Qormah e alou-bokhara wa dalnakhod   onion-based using veal or chicken, sour plums, lentils, and cardamom
Qormah e nadroo   onion-based, using lamb meat or veal, yogurt, lotus roots, cilantro, and coriander
Qormah e lawand   onion-based, using chicken, lamb, or beef, plus yogurt, turmeric, and cilantro
Qormah e sabzi   lamb, saut ed spinach, and other greens
Qormah e shalgham   onion-based using lamb, turnips, and sugar (sweet and sour taste)
Kabob[edit]
 Kofta Kabob with naan
Afghan kabob is most often found in restaurants and at outdoor street vendor stalls. Most of the time, it contains lamb meat. Kabob is made with naan instead of rice. Customers have the option to sprinkle sumac or ghora (dried ground sour grapes) on their kabob. Pieces of fat from the sheep's tail (jijeq) are usually added to the skewers to add extra flavor.
 Chopan kabob being prepared
Other popular kabobs include the lamb chop, ribs, kofta (ground beef), and chicken.
Chapli kebab, a specialty of eastern Afghanistan, is a patty of minced beef. It is a popular barbecue meal in both Pakistan and Afghanistan. It is prepared flat and round and served with naan. The original recipe of chapli kabob dictates a half-meat, half-flour mixture which renders it lighter in taste and less expensive.
Chicken[edit]
Afghan chicken or murgh-e is a classic example of one of the most famous dishes of Afghanistan. Chicken dishes are usually found in restaurants and at outdoor street vendor stalls. Unlike in the Indian cooking style, chicken in Afghan cuisine is often used with the intention that it be halal. Cream, butter, and curd are customary ingredients in all chicken recipes, whether served as an appetizer or a main course.
Quroot[edit]
Quroot (or qoroot) is a reconstituted dairy product, traditionally a by-product of butter made from sheep's or goat's milk. The residual buttermilk remaining after churning butter is soured further (by keeping it at room temperature for a few days), treated with salt, and then eventually boiled. The precipitated casein is filtered through cheesecloth, pressed in order to remove liquid, and then shaped into balls; the product is thus a hard and very sour cottage cheese. Though it can be eaten raw as a savory snack, it is typically served with cooked Afghan dishes such as aushak, mantu, and kichri qoroot.
Miscellaneous[edit]
This section is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (February 2022)
 A table setting of Afghan food in Kabul
 Badenjan (eggplant) is usually served for lunch as a light meal or as a side dish. It tastes best with freshly baked bread along with sour minted yogurt. Shomleh/shlombeh (a cold drink made of yogurt that is sprinkled with fresh or dried mint).
 Afghan men eating at a lunchtime feast in Kunar Weleyat
Afghan burger
Afghan Chatni[12] made with fresh coriander leaves
Afghan Kofta (meatballs)[13]
Afghan salad
Aush (hand-made noodles)
Baamiyah or Bhindi (cooked okra)
Badenjan (cooked eggplant with potatoes and tomatoes)
Badenjan-Burani (fried slices of eggplant, topped with a garlic sour cream sauce and sprinkled with dried mint)
Badenjan Salad (eggplant salad with garlic)
Bichak (small turnovers with various fillings, including potato and herbs, or ground meat)
Bolani also called  Buregian  in southern Afghanistan (somewhat similar to a quesadilla)
Chakida or chakka (type of sour cream)
Chopan (Pashto/Persian:  , meaning "shepherd") kabob (Pashto/Persian:  ) (skewered lamb chops grilled on charcoal)
Dampukht (steamed rice)
Delda or Oagra (mainly a Southern dish, whose main ingredient is a mixture of split wheat and a variety of beans)
Dolma (stuffed grape leaves)
Gosh e feel (thin, fried pastries covered in powdered sugar and ground pistachios)
Halwaua-e-Aurd-e-Sujee
Kaddo Borwani (sweet pumpkins)[1]
Kalah Chuquki or Kalah Gunjeshk (battered deep-fried bird heads)
Kalah Pacha (lamb or beef head/feet cooked in a broth, served in bowls as a soup dish or in a stew or curry)
Kebab (similar to Middle Eastern and Central Asian style)
Khoujoor[14] (Afghan pastry, deep-fried, oval-shaped, similar to doughnuts in taste)
Kichri (sticky medium-grain rice cooked with mung beans and onions)
Londi, or gusht-e-qaaq (spiced jerky)
Maast or labanyat (type of plain yogurt)
Maushawa (mixed beans and tiny meatballs, served in a bowl)
Moraba (fruit preserves, sugar syrup and fruits, apple, sour cherry, or various berries, or made with dried fruits. "Afghan favorite is the Alu-Bakhara".)
Nargis kabob (egg-based angel hair pasta soaked in sugar syrup, wrapped around a piece of meat)
Narenge Palau (dried sweet orange peel and green raisins with a variety of nuts, mixed with yellow rice glazed with light sugar syrup)
Osh Pyozee (stuffed onion)
Owmach (made from flour; a soup-like dish, very thick and pasty)
Salata (tomato and onion-based salad, often incorporating cucumber)
Rosh (cooked lamb and mutton with no spices)[15]
Shami kabob (cooked beef blended with spices, flour, and eggs, and rolled into hot dog shapes or flat round shapes and fried)
Shola Ghorbandi
Shor-Nakhood (chickpeas with special toppings)
Torshi (eggplant and carrot mixed with other herbs and spices, pickled in vinegar and aged)
Bolani
Cooked okra is also served for lunch or as a side dish
Afghan lamb kebab with yellow saffron rice
Roasted chicken
Samples of some native Afghan fruits
Desserts and snacks[edit]
 Samples of Afghan fresh and dried fruits
As a desert after a meal, most Afghans generally eat fresh fruit. For snacks, they may drink tea with something sweet like cakes, cookies or pastries. On occasions, they also eat dried fruits which are widely available in every Afghan market. Other typical desserts include the following: 
Afghan Cake (similar to pound cake, sometimes with real fruit or jelly inside)
Afghan Ice Cream
Baklava (pastry)
Cream roll (pastry)
Falooda or Faloodeh
Firini[16]
Fernea, sometimes spelled feereny, (milk and cornstarch help make this very sweet, similar to rice pudding without the rice)
Kolcha (variety of cookies, baked in clay ovens with charcoal)
Sheer Yakh, a traditional wet ice cream
Sheer khurma, a traditional dessert
Sheer Berinj (rice pudding)
Soups[edit]
This section is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (February 2022)
Shorba (Afghan soup similar to borscht)
Shorwa-E-Tarkari[17] (meat and vegetable soup)
Peyawa or Eshkana (a soup based on flour, similar to a gravy, but mixed with chopped onion, potatoes, and eggs)
Aushe Sarka (vinegar-based flat noodle soup)
Drinks[edit]
Chai[edit]
 Village elders and US special forces drinking Afghan green tea in 2007
Chai is tea in Afghanistan, which can either be green or black. It is consumed at all times, especially a short time after finishing a meal or with guests during any social gathering. Most people drink green tea with no sugar. Some add cardamom, saffron, or sugar.
Sheer chai (which translates from "milk tea") is also consumed but mostly in the morning and on special occasions. It is a type of Kashmiri chai. Many people of Afghanistan also drink masala chai, particularly in cities such as Asadabad, Jalalabad, Khost and Kandahar.
Doogh[edit]
Doogh (also known by some Afghans as shomleh or shlombeh) is a cold drink made by mixing water with yogurt and then adding fresh or dried mint. Some variations of doogh include the addition of crushed or diced cucumber chunks. It is the second most widely consumed drink in Afghanistan (the first being tea), especially during lunchtime in summer. Doogh can be found at almost every Afghan grocery store and is served in restaurants.
Eating habits[edit]
This section is empty.  You can help by adding to it.  (November 2021)
Sub-cuisines[edit]
While Afghans have a common cuisine, certain ethnicities form sub-variations of it.
Pashtun cuisine[edit]
Main article: Pashtun cuisine
Pashtuns are the largest ethnic group of Afghanistan, constituting about 42% of the country's total population.[18] A major dish in Pashtun culture are Rosh (cooked lamb and mutton with no spices)[15] and Sohbat, found at traditional gatherings and events.[19][20] Other major Pashtun dishes include lamb-skewered sajji and chapli kebab. The name dampukht stands for steamed meat, and Khaddi kebab is the Afghan shashlik, which is grilled on an open fire, on a spit.[21]
Although it differs from region to region, Pashtun cuisine is meat-heavy and often includes caramelized rice. For example, the dish known as bolani in the north and east is often called borogyen in the south and west of Afghanistan.
Common summer beverages include shlombeh, also known in Persian as doogh, a drink consisting of liquid yogurt, mint, and bedreng (Afghan cucumber). Sherbet is an ice-sugared cold drink. Sheer yakh is a sweet ice-like product, literally translating to "cold milk".[21]
Hazara cuisine[edit]
Main article: Hazaragi cuisine
The Hazara people in central Afghanistan (in the region of Hazarajat) and western Pakistan (Balochistan province) have their own fare. The Hazaragi cuisine shares some similarities with neighboring regional cuisines, so it is mainly influenced by Central Asian, Persian, and South Asian cooking. However, cooking methods vary in some of the dishes of these neighboring cuisines.
Dining etiquette[edit]
Traditionally, dinners are served on a tablecloth on the floor, which is called the dastarkhan. Meals are normally eaten with the right hand. After a meal, tea with dessert is served.[9]
Special occasions[edit]
Serving tea and white sugared almonds (called nuql) is customary during Afghan festivals.[3][22]
See also[edit]
Food portal
Culture of Afghanistan
Economy of Afghanistan
Portals: Society Food Afghanistan
References[edit]
^ a b "Exile on Charles Street: Restaurateur Qayum Karzai's life is split between Baltimore and his native Afghanistan". Baynard Woods. The Baltimore Sun. 3 March 2015. Archived from the original on 2021-12-27. Retrieved 2021-12-27.
^ "About Afghan food". SBS. 31 March 2021. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 13 November 2021.
^ a b c Brittin, Helen (2011). The Food and Culture Around the World Handbook. Boston: Prentice Hall. pp. 20 21. ISBN 9780135074817.
^ "Rare Heirloom Seeds   Baker Creek Heirloom Seeds". Baker Creek Heirloom Seeds. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2013-10-28.
^ "What to eat and drink in Afghanistan". Archived from the original on 2021-11-29. Retrieved 2021-11-29.
^ "Sheer Chai Afghan (Cardamom Tea with milk)". July 2020. Archived from the original on 2021-11-29. Retrieved 2021-11-29.
^ a b Ali, Tanveer (31 July 2012). "Everything You Need To Know About Afghan Food". foodrepublic. Archived from the original on 2015-07-13. Retrieved 2014-02-19.
^ "What do Afghan families like to eat for three meals a day? Why is it the healthiest country in the world?". iNews. 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022.
^ a b c McElroy, Linda. "Customs and Cuisine of Afghanistan". Archived from the original on 2021-11-29. Retrieved 2021-11-29.
^ Venkatraman, Vijaysree (6 December 2006). "Discovering Afghan Cuisine, a World Away". NPR. Archived from the original on 29 November 2021. Retrieved 29 November 2021.
^ "Afghan Cuisine: Challow". Afghanistan Online. 2018-04-09. Archived from the original on 2021-10-18. Retrieved 2021-10-18.
^ "Afghan Chatni made with fresh cilantro leaves, Watan Chat". March 12, 2017. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021.
^ Dea, Cynthia (March 9, 2015). "Where to Find the Best Meatballs in Los Angeles". KCET. Archived from the original on 2022-12-09. Retrieved 2022-12-30.
^ Chef , This. "Khajoor | Afghan Kitchen Recipes". Archived from the original on 2013-08-17. Retrieved 2013-08-09.
^ a b             Popular Rosh, Kandahar on YouTube
^ Firni Recipe Easy Dessert Recipe, Afghani Cuisine Firni , Phirni,Easy Sweet Dish Recipe ,    on YouTube
^ "Shorwa-E-Tarkari (Meat & Veg Soup) | Afghan Kitchen Recipes". Archived from the original on 2014-01-13. Retrieved 2013-08-09. {{cite web}}: |first= missing |last= (help)
^ "The Ethnic Groups Of Afghanistan". WorldAtlas. 10 September 2019. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. Retrieved 14 March 2018.
^ "Sohbat: The Pashtun Dish That Brings People Together". www.gounesco.com. 5 August 2016. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018.
^ ayesha.ibrahim (2016-08-05). "Sohbat: The Pashtun Dish That Brings People Together". Make Heritage Fun!. Archived from the original on 2021-05-12. Retrieved 2021-08-18.
^ a b Safia Haleem (1 May 2013). Pakistan   Culture Smart!: The Essential Guide to Customs & Culture. Kuperard. pp. 98 . ISBN 978-1-85733-678-8. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 15 March 2018.
^ "Afghan Cookbook". afghancookbook.tumblr.com. Archived from the original on 2020-11-20. Retrieved 2020-11-14.
Further reading[edit]
Helen J. Saberi (1997). "Travel and Food in Afghanistan".  In Harlan Walker (ed.). Food on the Move: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery, 1996. Prospect Books. ISBN 978-0-907325-79-6.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cuisine of Afghanistan.
vteAsian cuisineSovereign states
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
States with limitedrecognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan
Dependencies andother territories
British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau
vteCuisinesContinental
African
North
West
list
Americas
Caribbean
North
South
list
Asian
Caucasian
Central
Indian subcontinent
Levantine
list
European
Balkan
Central
Eastern
list
Oceanic
Intercontinental
Global
Latin American
Mediterranean
Middle Eastern
National andregional
Afghan
Albanian
Algerian
American
Californian
Floribbean
Hawaiian
Louisiana Creole
Lowcountry (South Carolina)
New England
New Mexico
Pacific Northwest
Pennsylvania Dutch
Puerto Rican
Southern US
Southwest US
Texas
Angolan
Argentine
Armenian
Australian
Austrian
Azerbaijani
Bahraini
Bangladeshi
Barbadian
Belarusian
Belgian
Belizean
Beninese
Bhutanese
Bolivian
Bosnian-Herzegovinian
Botswana
Brazilian
British
Channel Islands
English
Gibraltarian
Northern Irish
Saint Helena
Scottish
Welsh
Bruneian
Bulgarian
Burkinab 
Burmese
Burundian
Cambodian
Cameroonian
Canadian
Acadian
Qu b cois
Central African Republic
Chadian
Chilean
Chinese
Cantonese
Hong Kong
Macanese
Tibetan
Xinjiang
Colombian
Congolese
Corsican
Croatian
Cuban
Cypriot
Czech
Danish
Faroese
Greenlandic
Djiboutian
Dominican
Dominican Republic
Dutch
East Timorese
Ecuadorian
Egyptian
Emirati
Equatorial Guinean
Eritrean
Estonian
Ethiopian
Fijian
Filipino
Finnish
French
Occitan
French Guianan
Gabonese
Gambian
Georgian
German
Ghanaian
Greek
Cretan
Epirotic
Greek Macedonian
Heptanesean
Guatemalan
Guinea-Bissauan
Guinean
Haitian
Honduran
Hungarian
Icelandic
Indian
Arunachalese
Assamese
Bengali
Bihari
Goan
Gujarati
Himachal Pradesh
Kashmiri
Jharkhandi
Karnataka
Kerala
Maharashtrian
Manipuri
Meghalayan
Mizo
Naga
Odia
Punjabi
Rajasthani
Sikkimese
Sindhi
Tamil
Telangana
Telugu
Indonesian
Acehnese
Balinese
Banjar
Batak
Betawi
Indo
Javanese
Madurese
Makassar
Minahasan
Minangkabau
Palembangese
Sundanese
Iranian
Iraqi
Irish
Israeli
Italian
Abruzzese
Ligurian
Lombard
Lucanian
Neapolitan
Roman
Sardinian
Sicilian
Venetian
Ivorian
Jamaican
Japanese
Okinawan
Jordanian
Kazakh
Kenyan
Korean
North Korean
South Korean
Kosovan
Kuwaiti
Kyrgyz
Lao
Latvian
Lebanese
Lesotho
Liberian
Libyan
Liechtensteiner
Lithuanian
Luxembourg
Macedonian
Malagasy
Malawian
Malaysian
Sabahan
Sarawakian
Maldivian
Malian
Maltese
Mauritanian
Mauritian
Mexican
Moldovan
Mon gasque
Mongolian
Montenegrin
Moroccan
Mozambican
Namibian
Nauruan
Nepalese
New Zealand
Nicaraguan
Niger
Nigerian
Niuean
Norwegian
Omani
Pakistani
Palestinian
Panamanian
Peruvian
Polish
Portuguese
Qatari
Romanian (incl. Transylvanian Saxon)
Russian
Bashkir
Chechen
Circassian
Cossack
Komi
Mordovian
Sakha
Tatar
Udmurt
Yamal
Rwandan
Saint Lucian
Salvadoran
Sammarinese
S o Tom  and Pr ncipe
Saudi Arabian
Senegalese
Serbian
Seychellois
Sierra Leonean
Singaporean
Slovak
Slovenian
Somali
South African
Spanish
Andalusian
Asturian
Balearic
Basque
Canarian
Cantabrian
Catalan
Extremaduran
Galician
Manchegan
Valencian
Sri Lankan
Sudanese
Swazi
Swedish
Swiss
Syrian
Taiwanese
Tajik
Tanzanian
Zanzibari
Thai
Togolese
Tunisian
Turkish
Turkmen
Trinidadian and Tobagonian
Ugandan
Ukrainian
Uruguayan
Uzbek
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
Western Saharan
Yemeni
Zambian
Zimbabwean
Ethnic
Ainu
Arab
Indonesian
Aromanian
Assyrian
Balochi
Berber
Cajun
Chinese
American
Canadian
Chifa
Indian
Indonesian
Malaysian
Crimean Tatar
Greek American
Hazaragi
Indian
Anglo-Indian
Indonesian
Malaysian
Indigenous American
Inuit
Italian American
Kurdish
Livonian
Louisiana Creole
Malay
Ossetian
Parsi
Pashtun
Peranakan
Pontic Greek
Romani
S mi
Soul food
Sylheti
Transylvanian Saxon
Yup'ik
Religious
Buddhist
Christian
Goan Catholic
Mangalorean Catholic
Mennonite
Hindu
Islamic
Chinese
Ital
Jain
Jewish
American
Ashkenazi
Bukharan
Ethiopian
Mizrahi
Sephardic
Syrian
Ritual slaughter
Sikh
Historical
Ancient Egyptian
Ancient Greek
Ancient Israelite
Ancient Roman
Antebellum America
Aztec
Byzantine
Early modern European
Historical Chinese
Historical Indian subcontinent
Historical North Indian and Pakistani
History of agriculture
History of alcoholic drinks
History of bread
History of seafood
History of vegetarianism
Historical Argentine
Historical Japanese
Inca
Mayan
Muisca
Mughal
Medieval
Ottoman
Peasant
Scottish royal household
Soviet
Thirteen Colonies
Styles
Classique
Fast food
Fusion
New American
Eurasian
Haute
Molecular gastronomy
Note by Note
Nouvelle
Lists
List of cuisines
List of historical cuisines
Lists of prepared foods
Related
Cookbook
Cooking
Culinary arts
Drink
Food
history
Diet
Meal preparation
 Food portal
 Drink portal
 Category
 Commons
 Cookbook
 WikiProject
 Outline
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Israel
United States
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Afghan_cuisine&oldid=1149679028"