Subterranean geological structure formed by volcanic eruption
 Volcanic Pipe
Volcanic pipes or volcanic conduits are subterranean geological structures formed by the violent, supersonic eruption of deep-origin volcanoes. They are considered to be a type of diatreme. Volcanic pipes are composed of a deep, narrow cone of solidified magma (described as "carrot-shaped"), and are usually largely composed of one of two characteristic rock types   kimberlite or lamproite. These rocks reflect the composition of the volcanoes' deep magma sources, where the Earth is rich in magnesium. They are well known as the primary source of diamonds, and are mined for this purpose. Volcanic pipes are relatively rare by this definition based on minerals and depth of the magma source, but on the other hand volcanic diatremes are common, indeed the second commonest form of volcanic extrusion (that is magma that reaches the surface). 
Formation[edit]
Volcanic pipes form as the result of violent eruptions of deep-origin volcanoes.[1]  These volcanoes originate at least three times as deep as most other volcanoes, and the resulting magma that is pushed toward the surface is high in magnesium and volatile compounds such as water and carbon dioxide. As the body of magma rises toward the surface, the volatile compounds transform to gaseous phase as pressure is reduced with decreasing depth. This sudden expansion propels the magma upward at rapid speeds, resulting in a supersonic Plinian eruption.
 Mount Hypipamee Crater, Atherton Tableland, Queensland, Australia. This residue of a pipe is about 100 m (330 ft) across.
Kimberlite pipes[edit]
In kimberlite pipes, the eruption ejects a column of overlying material directly over the magma column, and does not form a large above-ground elevation as typical volcanoes do; instead, a low ring of ejecta known as a tuff ring forms around a bowl-shaped depression over the subterranean column of magma. Over time, the tuff ring may erode back into the bowl, leveling out the depression by filling it with washed-back ejecta. Kimberlite pipes are the source of most of the world's commercial diamond production, and also contain other precious gemstones and semi-precious stones, such as garnets, spinels, and peridot.
Lamproite pipes[edit]
Lamproite pipes operate similarly to kimberlite pipes, except that the boiling water and volatile compounds contained in the magma act corrosively on the overlying rock, resulting in a broader cone of eviscerated rock (the ejection of this rock also forms a tuff ring, like kimberlite eruptions). This broad cone is then filled with volcanic ash and materials. Finally, the degassed magma is pushed upward, filling the cone. The result is a funnel shaped deposit of volcanic material (both solidified magma, and ejecta) which appears mostly flat from the surface.
See also[edit]
Udachnaya pipe  Diamond mine in Sakha Republic, Russia, a diamond mine in Yakutia, Russia
Elliott County Kimberlite
Lake Ellen Kimberlite  Geological formation
References[edit]
^ Kresten, Peter; Troll, Valentin R. (2018). The Aln  Carbonatite Complex, central Sweden. Cham: Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-90224-1. OCLC 1046460156.
American Museum of Natural History. "The Nature of Diamonds". Retrieved March 17, 2005. Archived version
Tilling (1985). "Volcanoes" (excerpt). United States Geological Survey: Special Interest Publication. Retrieved March 17, 2005.
vteSubterraneaNatural featuresTypes
Alcove
Ant colony
Aquifer
Burrow
Burrow fossil
Communal burrow
Paleoburrow
Cave
Glacier cave
Grotto
Ice cave
Lava cave
Lava tube
Pit Cave
Show cave
Solutional cave
Cenote
Karst
Lava tree mold
Magma chamber
Maternity den
Pit crater
Rock shelter
Sinkhole
Subterranean river
Subterranean waterfall
Underground lake
Volcanic pipe
Warren
Exemplars
Balve Cave
Castellana Caves
Hang S n  o ng
Jewel Cave National Monument
Kazumura Cave
Lechuguilla Cave
Mammoth Cave National Park
Reed Flute Cave
Veryovkina Cave
Wind Cave National Park
Man-made featuresTypes
Air raid shelter
Basement
Burial vault
Borehole
Bunker
Blast shelter
Catacombs
Casemate
Crypt Mausoleum
Dungeon
Dugout (shelter)
Dry well
Earth shelter
Erdstall
Fallout shelter
Fogou
Foxhole
Hypogeum
Manhole
Mine
Missile launch facility
Passage grave
Quarry
Rock-cut tomb
Root cellar
Tunnel
Utility vault
Underground city
Underground base
Underground hangar
Well
Wine cave
Subway system
Secret passage
Semi-basement
Sewerage
Septic tank
Stepwell
Storm cellar
Smuggling tunnel
Spider hole
Ventilation shaft
Exemplars
816 Nuclear Military Plant
Caves of Maastricht
The Caves of  giss a
 Almad n Mercury Mines
Coober Pedy
Cheyenne Mountain Complex
Chicago Tunnel Company
Houston tunnel system
Kosvinsky Kamen
K b nya cellar system
Kome Caves
Underground City (Beijing)
Underground City, Montreal
Underground Great Wall of China
Maginot Line
Mines of Paris
Mustang Caves
Mount Yamantau
Mogao Caves
Naples underground geothermal zone
North American Aerospace Defense Command
Raven Rock Mountain Complex
Shanghai tunnels
Subterranean London
Subterranean Toledo
Turda Salt Mines
Yaodong
Fictional featuresTypes
Hollow Earth
Subterranean fiction
Exemplars
Allegory of the cave
Batcave
Greek Underworld
Journey to the Center of the Earth
Moria (Middle-earth)
Nome Kingdom
Pellucidar
Subterranea (comics)
Tunnels in popular culture
Underdark
Underland (Narnia)
Wonderland (fictional country)
Organisations
American Society of Reclamation Sciences
Bergamt
Cave Research Foundation
History of hard rock miners' organizations
National Mine Map Repository
National Mining Association
National Speleological Society
Grotto
Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining
Institution of Mining Engineers
International Union of Speleology
Research Centre for Deep Drilling
Society of Economic Geologists
Southern African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy
Related topics
Cave conservation
Cave dweller
Cave diving
Cave gate
Cave rescue
Cave painting
Caving
Civil defense
Tunnel warfare
Tunnel network
Trench warfare
Underground construction
Tunnel construction
Underground living
Mine rescue
Mine exploration
Mining engineering
Mole people
Speleology
Subterranean warfare
Authority control: National 
Germany
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Volcanic_pipe&oldid=1144353897"