Cut of beef
Tri-tipBottom sirloin triangular cut (tri-tip)Alternative namesBottom sirloin triangular cut (tri-tip)TypeBeef steak  Media: Tri-tip
 Tri-tip dinner with gravy, served with brown butter, parsley potatoes
The tri-tip is a triangular cut of beef from the bottom sirloin subprimal cut, consisting of the tensor fasciae latae muscle. Untrimmed, the tri-tip weighs around 5 pounds.[1]  In the US, the tri-tip is taken from NAMP cut 185C.
Etymology[edit]
 Roasted tri-tip
The precise origin of the name "tri-tip" for this cut of beef is unclear, with several sources claiming original usage of the term.  This cut of beef has been referred to by a variety of names including "Newport steak ,[2] "Santa Maria steak , "triangle tip , and "triangle steak . 
The cut was known in the United States as early as 1915, called "the triangle part" of the loin butt.[3] Rondo (Ron) Brough, a butcher for the U.S. Army during World War II working in Southern California, claimed that he created the "triangle tip" cut as a way to gain an extra portion of meat for the troops by reorienting nearby cuts and eliminating scrap. This practice caught on with Brough's Army colleagues and after the War, they began cutting and serving triangle tip throughout restaurants and butcher shops in California. 
Otto Schaefer Sr. originally named and marketed tri-tip in Oakland, California, in the 1950s.[4]
Butcher and restaurateur[5] Jack Ubaldi claimed to have originally named and marketed tri-tip under the name "Newport steak" in the 1950s.[2]
Triangle tip, cooked in wine, was served at Jack's Corsican Room in Long Beach in 1955.[6]  The cut was marketed under the name "tri-tip" as early as 1964, at Desert Provisions in Palm Springs.[7]
Larry Viegas, a butcher at a Santa Maria Safeway store in the late 1950s, claimed that the idea to cook this as a distinct cut of beef first occurred to his store manager, Bob Schutz, when an excess of hamburger existed in the store (into which this part of the animal were usually ground).[8] Viegas says that Schultz took a piece of the unwanted meat, seasoned it with salt, pepper, and garlic salt, and placed it on a rotisserie for 45 minutes or an hour; the result was well-received, and Schultz began marketing the cut as "tri-tip."[8]
It became a local specialty in Santa Maria in the late 1950s.[8] Today, it is seasoned with salt, pepper, fresh garlic, and other seasonings, grilled directly over red oak wood to medium-rare doneness. Alternative preparations include roasting whole on a rotisserie, smoking in a pit, roasting in an oven, grilling, or braising in a Dutch oven after searing on a grill. After cooking, the meat is normally sliced across the grain before serving.[9]
Sometimes labeled "Santa Maria steak," the roast is popular in the Central Valley regions and the Central Coast of California.[10] Along with top sirloin, tri-tip is considered central to Santa Maria-style barbecue. In central California, the fat is left on the outside of the cut to enhance flavor when grilling, while butchers elsewhere trim the fat side for aesthetic purposes.
Europe[edit]
Tri-tip is called aiguillette baronne in France and is left whole as a roast.[11] In northern Germany, it is called B rgermeisterst ck or Pastorenst ck, in Austria H ferschwanz, and in southern Germany it is called the same name as the traditional and popular Bavarian and Austrian dish Tafelspitz, which serves it boiled with horseradish. In Spain, it is often grilled whole and called the rabillo de cadera. 
South America[edit]
In Argentine asado, it is known as colita de cuadril.[12] In Brazil, it is known as maminha.
Cooking[edit]
This cut of beef can be sliced into steaks, grilled in its entirety, or used in chili con carne.[13] To grill or roast the tri-tip, heat the pan on high until it is very hot. For best results, the tri-tip should be seared and roasted, putting the fat side down in the pan.[citation needed] The roast can then be put in the oven and cooked for about 10 minutes per pound until the internal temperature is 127 F for medium-rare.[14]
See also[edit]
Bottom sirloin
Cut of beef
List of steak dishes
 Food portal
References[edit]
^ "Six Affordable Steaks You Should Be Buying". Chad Chandler. 2012-05-09. Retrieved 2017-12-03.
^ a b Ubaldi, Jack; Crossman, Elizabeth (1987). Jack Ubaldi's Meat Book: A Butcher's Guide to Buying, Cutting, and Cooking Meat. New York, NY: Macmillan Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0020073109.
^ Willy, John (17 September 2018). "The Hotel Monthly". J. Willy.   via Google Books.
^ My Father, a butcher in Oakland (Part 4)
^ "Jack Ubaldi, 90, a Chef, Butcher, Author and Teacher". The New York Times. 2001-07-28. Retrieved 2019-07-06.
^ "Moved: Beef "Tri-Tip" - The BBQ Butcher". askabutcher.proboards.com.
^ "The Desert Sun from Palm Springs, California on September 16, 1964   Page 9".
^ a b c "Elks Lodge 1538". Archived from the original on 2014-05-23. Retrieved 2014-05-23. 
^ "Tri-Tip - The Virtual Weber Bullet". virtualweberbullet.com.
^ Green, Aliza (2005). Field Guide to Meat. Philadelphia, PA: Quirk Books. ISBN 1-931686-79-3.
^ "L'aiguillette baronne" Archived 2007-10-15 at the Wayback Machine, CIV (Centre d'Information des Viandes)
^ "Argentinean Cuts of Beef : Asado Argentina". www.asadoargentina.com. Retrieved 2017-12-02.
^ Eats, Serious. "The Best Inexpensive Steak For The Grill Part 5: Tri-Tip". www.seriouseats.com.
^ "Grilled or Oven-Roasted Santa Maria Tri-Tip". New York Times. Retrieved 6 April 2018.
vteBeef and vealProduction
Argentine beef
Beef cattle
Cow calf operation
Feeder cattle
Kobe beef
Organic beef
Osorno Steer
ProductsCuts
Baseball steak
Blade steak
Brisket
Chateaubriand steak
Chuck steak
Fajita
Filet mignon
Flank steak
Flap steak
Hanger steak
Plate
Ranch steak
Restructured steak
Rib eye
Rib steak
Round
Rump
Short loin
Short ribs
Shoulder tender
Sirloin
Top sirloin
Skirt steak
Standing rib roast
Strip
Shank
T-bone
Tenderloin
Tri-tip
Trotters
Tail
Processed
Jerky
Aged
Bresaola
Cabeza
Corned beef
Frankfurter Rindswurst
Ground
Montreal smoked
Pastrami
Meat extract
Offal
Brain
Heart
Tongue
Tendon
Tripas
Tripe
Testicles
Dishes
Beefsteak
List of steak dishes
Balbacua
Blanquette de veau
Beef Wellington
Beef bourguignon
Beef bun
Beef Manhattan
Beef noodle soup
Beef on weck
Beef Stroganoff
Boiled beef
Bulgogi
Bulalo
Cachopo
Calf's liver and bacon
Cansi
Chateaubriand (dish)
Cheesesteak
Chicken fried steak
Cordon bleu
Dendeng
Feu
French dip
Ginger beef
Galbi
Gored gored
Gy don
Hamburg steak
Hortob gyi palacsinta
Iga penyet
Italian beef
Jellied veal
Kalio
Kara or eva  nicla
Kitfo
London broil
Mongolian beef
Neobiani
Ossobuco
Pares
Pho
Pot roast
Pozharsky cutlet
P'tcha
Ragout fin
Rawon
Rendang
Roast beef
Roast beef sandwich
Salisbury steak
Saltimbocca
Selat solo
Sha cha beef
Suea rong hai
Shooter's sandwich
Steak and kidney pudding
Steak Diane
Steak and eggs
Steak and oyster pie
Steak au poivre
Tartare
Tafelspitz
Tongseng
Veal Milanese
Veal Orloff
Veal Oscar
Vitello tonnato
Wallenbergare
Related meats
American bison
Beefalo
Water buffalo
 ubro 
Other
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
Beef hormone controversy
Beef ring
Carcass grade
Darkcutter
Meat on the bone
Ractopamine - Beef
USA beef imports
Japan
Taiwan
South Korea (2008 US beef protest in South Korea)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tri-tip&oldid=1120724585"