Capital and largest city of Andalusia and the province of Seville in Spain
For other uses, see Seville (disambiguation).
"Sevilla" redirects here. For the association football club, see Sevilla FC.
Municipality in Andalusia, SpainSeville
SevillaMunicipality
From top: Cathedral of Saint Mary of the See, Torre del Oro and the River Guadalquivir, Alc zar gardens, Plaza de Espa a, Metropol Parasol and the Triana Bridge.
FlagCoat of armsMotto: NO8DO ([Ella] No me ha dejado   [She] has not abandoned me)SevilleShow map of SpainSevilleShow map of AndalusiaSevilleShow map of Province of SevilleCoordinates: 37 14 N 5 59 W  /  37.24 N 5.99 W  / 37.24; -5.99Coordinates: 37 14 N 5 59 W  /  37.24 N 5.99 W  / 37.24; -5.99Country SpainAutonomous Community AndalusiaProvinceSevilleGovernment TypeAyuntamiento BodyAyuntamiento de Sevilla Mayor (2022)Antonio Mu oz (PSOE)Area Municipality140 km2 (50 sq mi)Elevation7 m (23 ft)Population (2021) Municipality684,234 Rank4th Density4,900/km2 (13,000/sq mi) Urban1,100,000[1] Metro1,519,639Demonym(s)Sevillan, Sevilliansevillano (m.), sevillana (f.)hispalenseTime zoneUTC+1 (CET) Summer (DST)UTC+2 (CEST)Postcode41001 41020, 41070 41071, 41080, 41092Websitewww.sevilla.org
Seville (/s v l/ s -VIL; Spanish: Sevilla, pronounced [se i a] (listen)) is the capital and largest city of the Spanish autonomous community of Andalusia and the province of Seville. It is situated on the lower reaches of the River Guadalquivir, in the southwest of the Iberian Peninsula.
Seville has a municipal population of about 701,000  as of 2022[update], and a metropolitan population of about 1.5 million, making it the largest city in Andalusia, the fourth-largest city in Spain and the 26th most populous municipality in the European Union. Its old town, with an area of 4 square kilometres (2 sq mi), contains a UNESCO World Heritage Site comprising three buildings: the Alc zar palace complex, the Cathedral and the General Archive of the Indies. The Seville harbour, located about 80 kilometres (50 miles) from the Atlantic Ocean, is the only river port in Spain.[2] The capital of Andalusia features hot temperatures in the summer, with daily maximums routinely above 35 C (95 F) in July and August.
Seville was founded as the Roman city of Hispalis. Known as Ishbiliyah after the Islamic conquest in 711, Seville became the centre of the independent Taifa of Seville following the collapse of the Caliphate of C rdoba in the early 11th century; later it was ruled by Almoravids and Almohads until being incorporated to the Crown of Castile in 1248.[3] Owing to its role as gateway of the Spanish Empire's trans-atlantic trade, managed from the Casa de Contrataci n, Seville became one of the largest cities in Western Europe in the 16th century. Coinciding with the Baroque period, the 17th century in Seville represented the most brilliant flowering of the city's culture; then began a gradual economic and demographic decline as silting in the Guadalquivir forced the trade monopoly to relocate to the nearby port of C diz.
The 20th century in Seville saw the tribulations of the Spanish Civil War, decisive cultural milestones such as the Ibero-American Exposition of 1929 and Expo '92, and the city's election as the capital of the Autonomous Community of Andalusia.
Name[edit]
Other names[edit]
Hisbaal is the oldest name for Seville. It appears to have originated during the Phoenician colonisation of the Tartessian culture in south-western Iberia and it refers to the god Baal.[4] According to Manuel Pellicer Catal n, the ancient name was Spal, and it meant "lowland" in the Phoenician language (cognate to the Hebrew Shfela and the Arabic Asfal  ).[5][6] During Roman rule, the name was Latinised as Hispal and later as Hispalis. After the Umayyad invasion, this name remained in use among the Mozarabs,[7] being adapted into Arabic as I b liya ( ): since the /p/ phoneme does not exist in Arabic, it was replaced by /b/; the Latin place-name suffix -is was Arabized as -iya, and a / / turned into   /i / due to the phonetic phenomenon called im la.[8]
In the meantime, the city's official name had been changed to  im  al-Andalus (   ), in reference to the city of Homs in modern Syria, the jund of which Seville had been assigned to upon the Umayyad conquest;[9][10][7][11] " im  al-Andalus" remained a customary and affectionate name for the city during the whole period throughout the Muslim Arab world,[7][12][13] being referred to for example in the encyclopedia of Yaqut al-Hamawi[14] or in Abu al-Baqa ar-Rundi's Ritha' al-Andalus.[15]
The city is sometimes referred to as the "Pearl of Andalusia".
The inhabitants of the city are known as sevillanos (feminine form: sevillanas) or hispalenses, after the Roman name of the city.
Motto[edit]
NO8DO is the official motto of Seville, popularly believed to be a rebus signifying the Spanish No me ha dejado, meaning "She [Seville] has not abandoned me". The phrase, pronounced with synalepha as [no ma  e xa o] no-madeja-do, is written with an eight in the middle representing the word madeja [ma exa] "skein [of wool]". Legend states that the title was given by King Alfonso X, who was resident in the city's Alc zar and supported by the citizens when his son, later Sancho IV of Castile, tried to usurp the throne from him.
The emblem is present on Seville's municipal flag, and features on city property such as manhole covers, and Christopher Columbus's tomb in the cathedral.
History[edit]
Main articles: History of Seville and Timeline of Seville
Seville is approximately 2,200 years old. The passage of the various civilizations instrumental in its growth has left the city with a distinct personality, and a large and well-preserved historical centre.
Early periods[edit]
 Treasure of El Carambolo, belonging to the ancient Tartessian sanctuary located 3 kilometers west of Seville.
 Section of Ca os de Carmona
The mythological founder of the city is Hercules (Heracles), commonly identified with the Phoenician god Melqart, who the myth says sailed through the Strait of Gibraltar to the Atlantic, and founded trading posts at the current sites of C diz and of Seville.[16] The original core of the city, in the neighbourhood of the present-day street, Cuesta del Rosario, dates to the 8th century BC,[17] when Seville was on an island in the Guadalquivir.[18] Archaeological excavations in 1999 found anthropic remains under the north wall of the Real Alc zar dating to the 8th 7th century BC.[19] The town was called Hisbaal by the Phoenicians and by the Tartessians, the indigenous pre-Roman Iberian people of Tartessos, who controlled the Guadalquivir Valley at the time.
The city was known from Roman times as Hispal and later as Hispalis. Hispalis developed into one of the great market and industrial centres of Hispania, while the nearby Roman city of Italica (present-day Santiponce, birthplace of the Roman emperors Trajan and Hadrian)[20] remained a typically Roman residential city. Large-scale Roman archaeological remains can be seen there and at the nearby town of Carmona as well.
Existing Roman features in Seville itself include the remains exposed in situ in the underground Antiquarium of the Metropol Parasol building, the remnants of an aqueduct, three pillars of a temple in M rmoles Street, the columns of La Alameda de H rcules and the remains in the Patio de Banderas square near the Seville Cathedral. The walls surrounding the city were originally built during the rule of Julius Caesar, but their current course and design were the result of Moorish reconstructions.[21]
Following Roman rule, there were successive conquests of the Roman province of Hispania Baetica by the Germanic Vandals, Suebi and Visigoths during the 5th and 6th centuries.
Middle Ages[edit]
In the wake of the Islamic conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, Seville (Spalis) was seemingly taken by Musa ibn Nusayr in the late summer of 712, while he was on his way to M rida.[22] Yet it had to be retaken in July 713 by troops led by his son Abd al-Aziz ibn Musa, as the Visigothic population who had fled to Beja had returned to Seville once Musa left for M rida.[22] The seat of the Wali of Al-Andalus (administrative division of the Umayyad Caliphate) was thus established in the city until 716,[22] when the capital of Al-Andalus was relocated to C rdoba.[23]
Seville (Ishb liya) was sacked by Vikings in the mid-9th century. After Vikings arrived by 25 September 844, Seville fell to invaders on 1 October, and they stood for 40 days before they fled from the city.[24] During Umayyad rule, under an Andalusi-Arab framework, the bulk of the population were Muladi converts, to which Christian and Jewish minorities added up.[25] Up until the arrival of the Almohads in the 12th century, the city remained as the see of a Metropolitan Archbishop,[26] the leading Christian religious figure in al-Andalus. However, the transfer of the relics of Saint Isidore to Le n circa 1063, in the taifa period, already hinted at a possible worsening of the situation of the local Christian minority.[27]
A powerful taifa kingdom with capital in Seville emerged after 1023,[28] in the wake of the fitna of al-Andalus. Ruled by the Abbadid dynasty, the taifa grew by aggregation of smaller neighbouring taifas.[28] During the taifa period, Seville became an important scholarly and literary centre.[28] After several months of siege, Seville was conquered by the Almoravids in 1091.[29]
The city fell to the Almohads on 17 January 1147 (12 Sha ban 541).[30][31] After an informal Almohad settlement in Seville during the early stages of the Almohad presence in the Iberian Peninsula and then a brief relocation of the capital of al-Andalus to C rdoba in 1162 (which had dire consequences for Seville, reportedly depopulated and under starvation),[32] Seville became the definitive seat of the Andalusi part of the Almohad Empire in 1163,[33][34] a twin capital alongside Marrakech. Almohads carried out a large urban renewal.[35] By the end of the 12th century, the walled enclosure perhaps contained 80,000 inhabitants.[36]
 Alc zar of Seville
See also: Siege of Seville
In the wider context of the Castilian Leonese conquest of the Guadalquivir Valley that ensued in the 13th century, Ferdinand III laid siege on Seville in 1247. A naval blockade came to prevent relief of the city.[37] The city surrendered on 23 November 1248,[38] after fifteen months of siege. The conditions of capitulation contemplated the eviction of the population, with contemporary sources seemingly confirming that a mass movement of people out of Seville indeed took place.[39]
The city's development continued after the Castilian conquest in 1248. Public buildings were constructed including churches many of which were built in the Mud jar and Gothic styles such as the Seville Cathedral, built during the 15th century with Gothic architecture.[40] Other Moorish buildings were converted into Catholic edifices, as was customary of the Catholic Church during the Reconquista. The Moors' Palace became the Castilian royal residence, and during Pedro I's rule it was replaced by the Alc zar (the upper levels are still used by the Spanish royal family as the official Seville residence).
 Cathedral of Saint Mary from Constituci n Avenue
After the 1391 pogrom, believed to having been instigated by the Archdeacon Ferrant Mart nez, all the synagogues in Seville were converted to churches (renamed Santa Mar a la Blanca, San Bartolom , Santa Cruz, and Convento Madre de Dios). The Jewish quarter's land and shops (which were located in modern-day Barrio Santa Cruz) were appropriated by the church. Many Jews were killed during the pogrom, although most were forced to convert.
 Casa de Pilatos
The first tribunal of the Spanish Inquisition was instituted in Seville in 1478. Its primary charge was to ensure that all nominal Christians were really behaving like Christians, and not practicing what Judaism they could in secret. At first, the activity of the Inquisition was limited to the dioceses of Seville and C rdoba, where the Dominican friar, Alonso de Ojeda, had detected converso activity.[41] The first Auto de F  took place in Seville on 6 February 1481, when six people were burned alive. Alonso de Ojeda himself gave the sermon. The Inquisition then grew rapidly. The Plaza de San Francisco was the site of the 'autos de f '. By 1492, tribunals existed in eight Castilian cities:  vila, C rdoba, Ja n, Medina del Campo, Segovia, Sig enza, Toledo, and Valladolid;[42] and by the Alhambra Decree all Jews were forced to convert to Catholicism or be exiled (expelled) from Spain.[43]
Early modern period[edit]
Following the Columbian exploration of the New World, Seville was chosen as headquarters of the Casa de Contrataci n in 1503, which was the decisive development for Seville becoming the port and gateway to the Indies.[44] Unlike other harbours, reaching the port of Seville required sailing about 80 kilometres (50 mi) up the River Guadalquivir. The choice of Seville was made in spite of the difficulties for navigation in the Guadalquivir stemming from the increasing tonnage of ships as a result of the relentless drive to make maritime transport cheaper during the late Middle Ages.[45] Nevertheless, technical suitability issues notwithstanding, the choice was still reasonable in the sense that Seville had become the largest demographic, economic and financial centre of Christian Andalusia in the late Middle Ages.[46]
A 'golden age of development' commenced in Seville, due to its being the only port awarded the royal monopoly for trade with the growing Spanish colonies in the Americas and the influx of riches from them.
Since only sailing ships leaving from and returning to the inland port of Seville could engage in trade with the Spanish Americas, merchants from Europe and other trade centres needed to go to Seville to acquire New World trade goods. The city's population grew to more than a hundred thousand people.[47]
 Seville in the late 16th century
 Anonymous painting illustrating the effects of the 1649 plague
In the late 16th century the monopoly was broken, with the port of C diz also authorised as a port of trade. Throughout the 17th century, colonial trade declined. Spain's American Colonies improved their production of basic goods, reducing their need to import. Compounded with these tribulations was the silting of the Guadalquivir river in the 1620s, which made Seville's harbors harder to use, and ceased upriver shipping.[48][49] The Great Plague of Seville in 1649, exacerbated by excessive flooding of the Guadalquivir, reduced the population by almost half, and it would not recover until the early 19th century.[50][51] By the 18th century, Seville's international importance was in decline. After the silting up of the harbour by the River Guadalquivir, upriver shipping ceased and the city went into relative economic decline.[citation needed]
The writer Miguel de Cervantes lived primarily in Seville between 1596 and 1600. Because of financial problems, Cervantes worked as a purveyor for the Spanish Armada, and later as a tax collector. In 1597, discrepancies in his accounts of the three years previous landed him in the Royal Prison of Seville for a short time. His short story Rinconete y Cortadillo, since the 19th century one of his most-read pieces, includes much description of Sevillian society; it features two young vagabonds who come to Seville, attracted by the riches and disorder that the 16th-century commerce with the Americas had brought to the city.
 1747 parade organised by the workers of the Royal Tobacco Factory
During the 18th century Charles III of Spain promoted Seville's industries. Construction of the Real F brica de Tabacos (Royal Tobacco Factory) began in 1728. It was the second-largest building in Spain, after the royal residence El Escorial. Since the 1950s it has been the seat of the rectorate (administration) of the University of Seville, as well as its Schools of Law, Philology (language/letters), Geography, and History.[52]
More operas have been set in Seville than in any other city of Europe. In 2012, a study of experts concluded the total number of operas set in Seville is 153. Among the composers who fell in love with the city are Beethoven (Fidelio), Mozart (The Marriage of Figaro and Don Giovanni), Rossini (The Barber of Seville), Donizetti (La favorite), and Bizet (Carmen).[53]
The first newspaper in Spain outside of Madrid was Seville's Hebdomario  til de Seville, which began publication in 1758.
Late modern history[edit]
 The Torre del Oro and the harbor in the second half of the 19th century
Between 1825 and 1833, Melchor Cano acted as chief architect in Seville; most of the urban planning policy and architectural modifications of the city were made by him and his collaborator Jose Manuel Arjona y Cuba.[54]
Industrial architecture surviving today from the first half of the 19th century includes the ceramics factory installed in the Carthusian monastery at La Cartuja in 1841 by the Pickman family, and now home to the El Centro Andaluz de Arte Contempor neo (CAAC),[55] which manages the collections of the Museo de Arte Contempor neo de Sevilla.[56] It also houses the rectory of the UNIA.[57]
In the years that Queen Isabel II ruled directly, about 1843 1868, the Sevillian bourgeoisie invested in a construction boom unmatched in the city's history. The Isabel II bridge, better known as the Triana bridge, dates from this period; street lighting was expanded in the municipality and most of the streets were paved during this time as well.[58]
By the second half of the 19th century, Seville had begun an expansion supported by railway construction and the demolition of part of its ancient walls, allowing the urban space of the city to grow eastward and southward. The Sevillana de Electricidad Company was created in 1894 to provide electric power throughout the municipality,[59] and in 1901 the Plaza de Armas railway station was inaugurated.
 Poster for the Ibero-American Exposition of 1929
The Museum of Fine Arts (Museo de Bellas Artes de Sevilla) opened in 1904.
In 1929 the city hosted the Ibero-American Exposition, which accelerated the southern expansion of the city and created new public spaces such as the Plaza de Espa a and the Maria Luisa Park. Not long before the opening, the Spanish government began a modernisation of the city in order to prepare for the expected crowds by erecting new hotels and widening the mediaeval streets to allow for the movement of automobiles.[60]
 General Varela rallying military and civilians in Seville (September 1936)
Seville fell very quickly at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War in 1936. General Queipo de Llano carried out a coup within the city, quickly capturing the city centre.[61] Radio Seville opposed the uprising and called for the peasants to come to the city for arms, while workers' groups established barricades.[61] Queipo then moved to capture Radio Seville, which he used to broadcast propaganda on behalf of the Francoist forces.[61] After the initial takeover of the city, resistance continued among residents of the working-class neighbourhoods for some time, until a series of fierce reprisals took place.[62]
Under Francisco Franco's rule Spain was officially neutral in World War II (although it did collaborate with the Axis powers),[63][64][65] and like the rest of the country, Seville remained largely economically and culturally isolated from the outside world. In 1953 the shipyard of Seville was opened, eventually employing more than 2,000 workers in the 1970s. Before the existence of wetlands regulation in the Guadalquivir basin, Seville suffered regular heavy flooding; perhaps worst of all were the floods that occurred in November 1961 when the River Tamarguillo, a tributary of the Guadalquivir, overflowed as a result of a prodigious downpour of rain, and Seville was consequently declared a disaster zone.[66]
Trade unionism in Seville began during the 1960s with the underground organisational activities of the Workers' Commissions or Comisiones Obreras (CCOO), in factories such as Hytasa, the Astilleros shipyards, Hispano Aviaci n, etc. Several of the movement's leaders were imprisoned in November 1973.[citation needed]
Recent developments[edit]
On 3 April 1979 Spain held its first democratic municipal elections after the end of Franco's dictatorship; councillors representing four different political parties were elected in Seville. On 5 November 1982, Pope John Paul II arrived in Seville to officiate at a Mass before more than half a million people at the fairgrounds. He visited the city again on 13 June 1993, for the International Eucharistic Congress.
 European Union pavilion of the 1992 Universal Exposition as it was at the time.
In 1992, coinciding with the fifth centenary of the Discovery of the Americas, the Universal Exposition was held for six months in Seville, on the occasion of which the local communications network and urban infrastructure was greatly improved under a 1987 PGOU plan launched by Mayor Manuel del Valle:[67] the SE-30 ring road around the city was completed and new highways were constructed; the new Seville-Santa Justa railway station had opened in 1991, while the Spanish High-Speed Rail system, the Alta Velocidad Espa ola (AVE), began to operate between Madrid-Seville. The Seville Airport was expanded with a new terminal building designed by the architect Rafael Moneo, and various other improvements were made. The Alamillo Bridge and the Centenario Bridge, both crossing over the Guadalquivir, also were built for the occasion. Some of the installations remaining at the site after the exposition were converted into the Scientific and Technological Park Cartuja 93.
In 2004 the Metropol Parasol project, commonly known as Las Setas (The Mushrooms), due to the appearance of the structure, was launched to revitalise the Plaza de la Encarnaci n, for years used as a car park and seen as a dead spot between more popular tourist destinations in the city. The Metropol Parasol was completed in March 2011,[68] costing just over  102 million in total, more than twice as much as originally planned.[69] Constructed from crossed wooden beams, Las Setas is said to be the largest timber-framed structure in the world.[70]
 Metropol Parasol, locally also known as Las Setas, by the German architect J rgen Mayer
Geography and climate[edit]
Location[edit]
 Satellite imagery of Seville (Sentinel-2, Copernicus Programme, European Space Agency)
Seville has an area of 141 km2 (54 sq mi), according to the National Topographic Map (Mapa Topogr fico Nacional) series from the Instituto Geogr fico Nacional  Centro Nacional de Informaci n Geogr fica, the country's civilian survey organisation (pages 984, 985 and 1002). The city is situated in the fertile valley of the River Guadalquivir. The average height above sea level is 7 metres (23 feet). Most of the city is on the east side of the river, while Triana, La Cartuja and Los Remedios are on the west side. The Aljarafe region lies further west, and is considered part of the metropolitan area. The city has boundaries on the north with La Rinconada, La Algaba and Santiponce; on the east with Alcal  de Guadaira; on the south with Dos Hermanas and Gelves and on the west with San Juan de Aznalfarache, Tomares and Camas.
Seville is on the same parallel as United States west coast city San Jose in central California. S o Miguel, the main island of the Azores archipelago, lies on the same latitude. Further east from Seville in the Mediterranean Basin, it is on the same latitude as Catania in Sicily, Italy and just south of Athens, the capital of Greece. Beyond that, it is located on the same parallel as South Korean capital, Seoul. Seville is located inland, not very far from the Andalusian coast, but still sees a much more continental climate than the nearest port cities, C diz and Huelva. Its distance from the sea makes summers in Sevilla much hotter than along the coastline.
Climate[edit]
 Skyline of Seville from the top of the Giralda
Seville has a Mediterranean climate (K ppen climate classification Csa), featuring very hot, dry summers and mild winters with moderate rainfall.[71] Seville has an annual average of 19.2 C (67 F). The annual average temperature is 25.4 C (78 F) during the day and 13.0 C (55 F) at night.[72] Seville is located in the lower part of the Guadalquivir Valley, which is often referred to as "the frying pan of Spain", as it features the hottest cities in the country.[73][74][75]
Seville is the warmest city in Continental Europe.[76] It is also the hottest major metropolitan area in Europe, with summer average high temperatures of above 35 C (95 F)[77] and also the hottest in Spain.[78] After the city of C rdoba (also in Andalusia), Seville has the hottest summer in continental Europe among all cities with a population over 100,000 people, with average daily highs of 36.0 C (97 F) in July.[79]
Temperatures above 40 C (104 F) are not uncommon in summer. The hottest temperature extreme of 46.6 C (116 F) was registered by the weather station at Seville Airport on 23 July 1995 while the coldest temperature extreme of  5.5 C (22 F) was also registered by the airport weather station on 12 February 1956.[80] A historical record high (disputed) of 50.0 C (122 F) was recorded on 4 August 1881, according to the NOAA Satellite and Information Service.[81] There is an unaccredited record by the National Institute of Meteorology of 47.2 C (117 F) on 1 August during the 2003 heat wave, according to a weather station (83910 LEZL) located in the southern part of Seville Airport, near the former US San Pablo Air Force Base. This temperature would be one of the highest ever recorded in Spain, yet it hasn't been officially confirmed.[82]
The average sunshine hours in Seville are approximately 3000 per year. Snowfall is virtually unknown, and the last important snowfall occurred in 1954. Since the year 1500, only 10 snowfalls have been recorded/reported in Seville. During the 20th century, Seville registered just 2 snowfalls, the last one on 2 February 1954.[83][84]
Winters are mild: December and January are the coolest months, with average maximum temperatures around 16 to 17 C (61 to 63 F) and minimums of 6 to 7 C (43 to 45 F).
Summers are very hot: July and August are the hottest months, with average maximum temperatures around 35 to 36 C (95 to 97 F) and minimums of 20 to 21 C (68 to 70 F).
Precipitation varies from 500 to 600 mm (19.7 to 23.6 in) and there are around 50 rainy days per year, with frequent torrential rain. December is the wettest month, with an average rainfall of 99 millimetres (3.9 in).
Climate data for Seville Airport (1981 2010), extremes (1941 present)
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high  C ( F)
24.2(75.6)
28.0(82.4)
32.9(91.2)
35.4(95.7)
41.0(105.8)
45.2(113.4)
46.6(115.9)
45.9(114.6)
44.8(112.6)
36.6(97.9)
31.2(88.2)
24.5(76.1)
46.6(115.9)
Average high  C ( F)
16.2(61.2)
18.1(64.6)
21.9(71.4)
23.4(74.1)
27.2(81.0)
32.2(90.0)
36.0(96.8)
35.5(95.9)
31.7(89.1)
26.0(78.8)
20.2(68.4)
16.6(61.9)
25.4(77.7)
Daily mean  C ( F)
11.0(51.8)
12.5(54.5)
15.6(60.1)
17.3(63.1)
20.7(69.3)
25.1(77.2)
28.2(82.8)
27.9(82.2)
25.0(77.0)
20.2(68.4)
15.1(59.2)
11.9(53.4)
19.2(66.6)
Average low  C ( F)
5.7(42.3)
7.0(44.6)
9.2(48.6)
11.1(52.0)
14.2(57.6)
18.0(64.4)
20.3(68.5)
20.4(68.7)
18.2(64.8)
14.4(57.9)
10.0(50.0)
7.3(45.1)
13.0(55.4)
Record low  C ( F)
 4.4(24.1)
 5.5(22.1)
 2.0(28.4)
1.0(33.8)
3.8(38.8)
8.4(47.1)
11.4(52.5)
12.0(53.6)
8.6(47.5)
2.0(35.6)
 1.4(29.5)
 4.8(23.4)
 5.5(22.1)
Average precipitation mm (inches)
66(2.6)
50(2.0)
36(1.4)
54(2.1)
31(1.2)
10(0.4)
2(0.1)
5(0.2)
27(1.1)
68(2.7)
91(3.6)
99(3.9)
539(21.2)
Average precipitation days (  1 mm)
6.1
5.8
4.3
6.1
3.7
1.3
0.2
0.5
2.4
6.1
6.4
7.5
50.5
Average relative humidity (%)
71
67
59
57
53
48
44
48
54
62
70
74
59
Mean monthly sunshine hours
183
189
220
238
293
317
354
328
244
217
181
154
2,918
Source: Agencia Estatal de Meteorolog a[85][86]
Government[edit]
Municipal government and administration[edit]
Main article: City Council of Seville
 Plenary meeting of the municipal council in the Seville's city hall, seat of Ayuntamiento.
Seville is a municipality, the basic level of local government in Spain. The Ayuntamiento is the body charged with the municipal government and administration. The Plenary of the ayuntamiento is formed by 31 elected municipal councillors, who in turn invest the mayor. The last municipal election took place on 26 May 2019. The current mayor is Antonio Mu oz (Spanish Socialist Workers' Party), who has held the post since the reign of the previous mayor, Juan Espadas in early 2022.
Regional and provincial capital[edit]
Seville is the capital of the autonomous community of Andalusia, according to Article 4 of the Statute of Autonomy of Andalusia of 2007, and is the capital of the Province of Seville as well. The historical building of the Palace of San Telmo is now the seat of the presidency of the Andalusian Autonomous Government. The administrative headquarters are in Torre Triana, in La Cartuja. The Hospital de las Cinco Llagas (literally, "Hospital of the Five Holy Wounds") is the current seat of the Parliament of Andalusia.
Districts and neighbourhoods[edit]
Main article: Districts and neighbourhoods of Seville
The municipal administration is decentralized into 11 districts, further divided into 108 neighbourhoods.
Casco Antiguo
Distrito Sur
Triana
Macarena
Nervi n
Los Remedios
Este-Alcosa-Torreblanca
Cerro-Amate
Bellavista-La Palmera
San Pablo-Santa Justa
Main sights[edit]
Main article: Sights and landmarks of Seville
See also: Azulejo
Seville is a big tourist centre in Spain. In 2018, there were over 2.5 million travellers and tourists who stayed at a tourist accommodation, placing it third in Spain after Madrid and Barcelona. The city has an overall low level of seasonality, so there are tourists year-round.[87] There are many landmarks, museums, parks, gardens and other kinds of tourist spots around the city so there is something for everyone.
The Alc zar, the Cathedral, and the Archivo General de Indias (General Archive of the Indies) are UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
Landmarks[edit]
 La Giralda, originally built by the Almohads as a minaret to the Great Mosque of Seville, is now the bell tower of the cathedral.
 The Torre del Oro is another example of Almohad architecture in the city.
The St. Mary of the See Cathedral was built from 1401 to 1519 after the Reconquista on the former site of the city's mosque. It is among the largest of all medieval and Gothic cathedrals, in terms of both area and volume. The interior is the longest nave in Spain and is lavishly decorated, with a large quantity of gold evident. La Giralda is a tower attached to the Cathedral that dates back to the twelfth century. It was originally built as part of a mosque when the Moors ruled in Spain and was later added onto by the Christians. Tourists today can climb the tower by walking up a series of ramps that were previously used by officials who rode their horses to the top of the tower. The overall tower construction is consistent with Roman lighthouse construction methods such as with the
Tower of Hercules (circa 2nd century CE) built on the northwest coast of Spain. La Giralda gets its name from the weathervane attached to the very top of it, as "gira" means "turning one" in the Spanish language.
The Alc zar facing the cathedral was developed from a previous Moorish Palace which was developed from a Visigoth establishment which was itself developed from an existing Roman construction. The redevelopment was started in 1181 and continued for over 500 years, mainly in the Mud jar style, but also in the Renaissance style. The TV show Game of Thrones has shot many scenes at this location.
The Church of Saint Louis of France, located in the historic district of Seville represents an example of Baroque architecture in the 18th century.
The Torre del Oro was built as a watchtower and defensive barrier on the river. The river was used as a mode of defense. A chain was strung through the water from the base of the tower to prevent boats from traveling into the river port.
The City Hall was built in the 16th century in high Plateresque style by master architect Diego de Ria o. The fa ade to Plaza Nueva was built in the 19th century in Neoclassical style.
The Palacio de San Telmo, formerly the University of Sailors, and later the Seminary, is now the seat for the Andalusian Autonomous Government. It is one of the most emblematic buildings of baroque architecture, mainly to its world-renowned churrigueresque principal fa ade and the impressive chapel.[88]
The Royal Tobacco Factory is housed on the original site of the first tobacco factory in Europe, a vast 18th-century building in Baroque style and the purported inspiration for the opera Carmen.
The Metropol Parasol, in La Encarnaci n square, is the world's largest wooden structure.[89] A monumental umbrella-like building designed by the German architect J rgen Mayer, finished in 2011. This modern architecture structure houses the central market and an underground archaeological complex. The terrace roof is a city viewpoint.[90]
The General Archive of the Indies, is the repository of extremely valuable archival documents illustrating the history of the Spanish Empire in the Americas and the Philippines. The building itself, an unusually serene and Italianate example of Spanish Renaissance architecture, was designed by Juan de Herrera.
The Plaza de Espa a in the Parque de Mar a Luisa (Mar a Luisa Park) was built by the architect An bal Gonz lez for the 1929 Exposici n Ibero-Americana. It is an outstanding example of Regionalist Revival Architecture, a bizarre and loftily conceived mixture of diverse historic styles, such as Art Deco and lavishly ornamented with typical glazed tiles.[91][92]
The Moorish urban influences continued and are present in contemporary Seville, for instance in the custom of decorating with plants and small fountains in the courtyards of the houses. However, most buildings of the Moorish aesthetic actually belong to the Mud jar style of Islamic art, developed under Christian rule and inspired by the Arabic style. Original Moorish buildings are the Patio del Yeso in the Alc zar, the city walls, and the main section of the Giralda, the bell tower of the Seville Cathedral.[93]
The neighbourhood of Triana, situated on the west bank of the River Guadalquivir, had an important role in the history of the city and constitutes by itself a folk, monumental and cultural centre.
On the other hand, La Macarena neighbourhood is located on the northern side of the city centre. It contains some important monuments and religious buildings, such as the Museum and Catholic Church of La Macarena or the Hospital de las Cinco Llagas.
 Plaza de Espa a, panoramic view.
Museums[edit]
 Museum of Fine Arts of Seville
 Museum of Arts and Traditions
The most important art collection of Seville is the Museum of Fine Arts of Seville. It was established in 1835 in the former Convent of La Merced. It holds many masterworks by Murillo, Pacheco, Zurbar n, Vald s Leal, and others masters of the Baroque Sevillian School, containing also Flemish paintings of the 15th and 16th centuries.
Other museums in Seville are:
The Archaeological Museum, which contains collections from the Tartessian, Roman and some of Almohad and Christian periods, located in Am rica square at the Parque de Mar a Luisa (Mar a Luisa Park).
The Museum of Arts and Traditions, also in Am rica Square, in front of the Archaeological Museum.
The Andalusian Contemporary Art Centre, situated in the neighbourhood of La Cartuja.
The Naval Museum, housed in the golden Torre del Oro, next to the River Guadalquivir.
The Carriages Museum, in the Los Remedios neighbourhood.
The Flamenco Art Museum
The Bullfighting Museum, in the La Maestranza bullring
The Palace of the Countess of Lebrija, a private collection that contains many of the mosaic floors discovered in the nearby Roman town of Italica.
The Centro Vel zquez (Vel zquez Centre) located at the Old Priests Hospital in the touristic Santa Cruz neighbourhood.
The Antiquarium in Metropol Parasol, an underground museum which is composed of the most important archaeological site of the ancient Roman stage of Seville and remains preserved.
The Castillo de San Jorge (Castle of St. George) is situated near the Triana market, next to the Isabel II bridge. It was the last seat for the Spanish Inquisition.
The Museum and Treasure of La Macarena, where the collection of the Macarena brotherhood is exhibited. This exhibition gives visitors an accurate impression of Seville's Holy Week.
La Casa de la Ciencia (The House of Science), a science centre and museum opposite the Mar a Luisa Park.
Museum of Pottery in Triana.
Pabellon de la Navegaci n (Pavilion of Navigation).
Parks and gardens[edit]
 Parque de Mar a Luisa
The Parque de Mar a Luisa (Mar a Luisa Park), is a monumental park built for the 1929 World's Fair held in Seville, the Exposici n Ibero-Americana. The so-called Jardines de las Delicias (literally, Delighting Gardens), closer to the river, are part of the Parque de Mar a Luisa.
The Alc zar Gardens, within the grounds of the Alc zar palace, consist of several sectors developed in different historical styles.
The Gardens of Murillo and the Gardens of Catalina de Ribera, both along and outside the South wall of the Alc zar, lie next to the Santa Cruz quarter.
The Parque del Alamillo y San Jer nimo, the largest park in Andalusia, was originally built for Seville Expo '92 to reproduce the Andalusian native flora. It lines both Guadalquivir shores around the San Jer nimo meander. The 32-metres-high bronze sculpture, The Birth of a New Man (popularly known as Columbus's Egg, el Huevo de Col n), by the Georgian sculptor Zurab Tsereteli,[94] is located in its northwestern sector.
The American Garden, also completed for Expo '92, is in La Cartuja. It is a public botanical garden, with a representative collection of American plants donated by different countries on the occasion of the world exposition. Despite its extraordinary botanical value, it remains a mostly abandoned place.
The Buhaira Gardens, also historically known as the Huerta del Rey, are a public park and historic site, originally created as a garden estate during the Almohad period (12th century).[95][96]: 211 
 The Alc zar Gardens
Culture[edit]
Theaters[edit]
 Teatro Lope de Vega
The Teatro Lope de Vega is located on Avenida de Mar a Luisa avenue (next to Parque de Mar a Luisa). It was built in 1929, being its architect Vicente Traver y Tom s. It was the auditorium of the pavilion of the city in the Ibero-American Exhibition. This pavilion had a large room that became the Casino of the Exhibition. The theater occupied an area of 4600 m2 and could accommodate 1100 viewers. Its architecture is Spanish Baroque Revival, being the building faithful to this style both in the set and in its ornamentation.
It has hosted varied performances, including theater, dance, opera, jazz, and flamenco and nowadays the most outstanding of the panorama is its programming national and international, becoming one of the most important theaters in Spain.[97]
Others important theatres are Teatro de la Maestranza, Auditorio Roc o Jurado and Teatro Central.
Seville also has a corral de comedias theatre, which is the Corral del Coliseo, now used as a residential building.
Festivals[edit]
There are many entertainment options around the city of Seville and one of its biggest attractions is the numerous festivals that happen around the year. Some of the festivals concentrate on religion and culture, others focus on the folklore of the area, traditions, and entertainment.[98]
Holy Week in Seville[edit]
Main article: Holy Week in Seville
 Guiding cross of the cofrad a of La Macarena as it passes through the Street of Fray Luis Sotelo.
Semana Santa is celebrated all over Spain and Latin America, but the celebration in Seville is large and well known as a Fiesta of International Tourist Interest. 54 local brotherhoods,[99] or "cofrad as", organize floats and processions throughout the week, reenacting the story of the Passion of Christ. There is traditional music and art incorporated into the processions, making Semana Santa an important source of both material and immaterial Sevillian cultural identity.[100][101][102]
Bienal de Flamenco[edit]
Seville is home to the bi-annual flamenco festival La Bienal, which claims to be "the biggest flamenco event worldwide" and lasts for nearly a month.
[103]
Vel  de Santiago y Santa Ana[edit]
In the district of Triana, the Vel  de Santiago y Santa Ana is held every July and includes sporting events, performances, and cultural activities as the city honors St. James and St. Ana.
[104]
Feria de Abril[edit]
Main article: Seville Fair
 Casetas in the 2012 Feria de Abril
The April Fair (Feria de Abril) is a huge celebration that takes place in Seville about two weeks after the Holy Week. It was previously associated with celebrating livestock; however, nowadays its purpose is to create a fun cheerful environment tied to the appreciation of the Spanish folklore.[105]
During the Feria, families, businesses, and organisations set up casetas (marquees) in which they spend the week dancing, drinking, and socialising. Traditionally, women wear elaborate flamenco dresses and men dress in their best suits. The marquees are set up on a permanent fairground in the district of Los Remedios,[106] in which each street is named after a famous bullfighter.
Sal n N utico Internacional de Sevilla[edit]
The International Boat Show of Seville is an annual event that takes place in the only indoor maritime port of the country, which is one of the most important in Europe.[107]
Music[edit]
 Hailing from Seville, Triana is considered as the benchmark of flamenco rock and as the founding fathers of rock andaluz.[108]
Seville had a vibrant rock music scene in the 1970s and 1980s[109] with bands like Triana, Alameda and Smash, who fused Andalusia's traditional flamenco music with British-style progressive rock. The punk rock group Reincidentes and indie band Sr Chinarro, as well as singer Kiko Veneno, rose to prominence in the early 1990s. The city's music scene now features rap acts such as SFDK, Mala Rodr guez, Dareysteel, Tote King, Dogma Crew, Bisley DeMarra, Haze and Jesuly. Seville's diverse music scene is reflected in the variety of its club-centred nightlife.
The city is also home to many theatres and performance spaces where classical music is performed, including Teatro Lope de Vega, Teatro La Maestranza, Teatro Central, the Real Alcazar Gardens and the Sala Joaqu n Turina.
Despite its name, the sevillana dance, commonly presented as flamenco, is not thought to be of Sevillan origin. However, the folksongs called sevillanas are authentically Sevillan, as is the four-part dance performed with them.
In 2023, Seville will host the 24th Annual Latin Grammy Awards, making Seville the first city outside of the United States to host the Latin Grammy Awards. [110]
Flamenco[edit]
Main article: Flamenco
 Flamenco costume during Seville Fair
The Triana district in Seville is considered a birthplace of flamenco, where it found its beginning as an expression of the poor and marginalized. Seville's Gypsy population, known as Flamencos, were instrumental in the development of the art form. While it began as and remains a representation of Andalusian culture, it has also become a national heritage symbol of Spain.
[111]
[112]
[113]
[114]
There are more flamenco artists in Seville than anywhere else in the country, supporting an entire industry surrounding it and drawing in a significant amount of tourism for the city.
[115]
Gastronomy[edit]
 Andalusian Gazpacho
The tapas scene is one of the main cultural attractions of the city: people go from one bar to another, enjoying small dishes called tapas (literally "lids" or "covers" in Spanish, referring to their probable origin as snacks served on small plates used to cover drinks). Local specialities include fried and grilled seafood (including squid, choco (cuttlefish), swordfish, marinated dogfish, and ortiguillas), grilled and stewed meat, spinach with chickpeas, Jam n ib rico, lamb kidneys in sherry sauce, snails, caldo de puchero, and gazpacho. A sandwich known as a serranito is the typical and popular version of fast food.
Typical desserts from Seville include pesti os, a honey-coated sweet fritter; torrijas, fried slices of bread with honey; roscos fritos, deep-fried sugar-coated ring doughnuts; magdalenas or fairy cakes; yemas de San Leandro,[citation needed] which provide the city's convents with a source of revenue; and tortas de aceite, a thin sugar-coated cake made with olive oil. Polvorones and mantecados are traditional Christmas products, whereas pesti os and torrijas are typically consumed during the Holy Week.
Bitter Seville oranges grow on trees lining the city streets. Large quantities are collected and exported to Britain to be used in marmalade.[116] Locally, the fruit is used predominantly in aromatherapy, herbal medicine, and dietary diet products, rather than as a foodstuff.[117] According to legend, the Arabs brought the bitter orange to Seville from East Asia via Iraq around the 10th century to beautify and perfume their patios and gardens, as well as to provide shade.[118] The flowers of the tree are a source of neroli oil, commonly used in perfumery and in skin lotions for massage.
In 2021, the municipal water company, Emasesa, began a pilot scheme to use the methane produced as the fruit ferments to generate clean electricity. The company plans to use 35 tonnes of fruit to generate clean energy to power one of the city's water purification plants.[119]
Economy[edit]
 Avenida de la Constituci n
Seville is the most populated city in southern Spain, and has the largest GDP (gross domestic product) of any in Andalusia,[120] accounting for one-quarter of its total GDP.[120] All municipalities in the metropolitan area depend directly or indirectly on Seville's economy, while agriculture dominates the economy of the smaller villages, with some industrial activity localised in industrial parks. The Diputaci n de Sevilla (Deputation of Seville), with provincial headquarters in the Antiguo Cuartel de Caballer a (Old Cavalry Barracks) on Avenida Menendez Pelayo, provides public services to distant villages that they can not provide themselves.[121]
The economic activity of Seville cannot be detached from the geographical and urban context of the city; the capital of Andalusia is the centre of a growing metropolitan area. Aside from traditional neighbourhoods such as Santa Cruz, Triana and others, those further away from the centre, such as Nervi n, Sevilla Este, and El Porvenir have seen recent economic growth. Until the economic crisis of 2007, this urban area saw significant population growth and the development of new industrial and commercial parks.[122]
During this period, availability of infrastructure in the city contributed to the growth of an economy dominated by the service sector,[123] but in which industry still holds a considerable place.[124]
Infrastructure[edit]
 Sevilla Tower on the Isla de La Cartuja, designed by the architect C sar Pelli
The 1990s saw massive growth in investment in infrastructure in Seville, largely due to its hosting of the Universal Exposition of Seville in 1992. This economic development of the city and its urban area is supported by good transportation links to other Spanish cities, including a high-speed AVE railway connection to Madrid, and a new international airport.
Seville has the only inland port in Spain, located 80 km (50 mi) from the mouth of the River Guadalquivir. This harbour complex offers access to the Atlantic and the Mediterranean and allows trade in goods between the south of Spain (Andalusia, Extremadura) and Europe, the Middle East and North Africa. The port has undergone reorganisation. Annual tonnage rose to 5.3 million tonnes of goods in 2006.[125]
Cartuja 93 is a research and development park,[126] employing 15,000 persons. The Parque Tecnol gico y Aeron utico Aer polis (Technological and Aeronautical Park)[127] is focused on the aircraft industry. Outside of Seville are nine PS20 solar power towers which use the city's sunny weather to provide most of it with clean and renewable energy.
The Sevilla Tower skyscraper was started in March 2008 and was completed in 2015. With a height of 180.5 metres (592 feet) and 40 floors, it's the tallest building in Andalusia.
Seville has conference facilities, including the Conference and Convention Centre.
 Heineken brewery in Seville
Research and development[edit]
The Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient ficas en Sevilla (CSIC) is based in the former Pavilion of Peru in the Maria Luisa Park. In April 2008 the city council of Seville provided a grant to renovate the building to create the Casa de la Ciencia (Science Centre) to encourage popular interest in science.[128]
The internationally recognised company Neocodex has its headquarters in Seville; it maintains the first and largest DNA bank in Spain and has made significant contributions to scientific research in genetics.[129] Seville is also considered an important technological and research centre for renewable energy and the aeronautics industry.[130][131]
The output of the research centres in Sevillan universities working in tandem with city government, and the numerous local technology companies, have made Seville a leader among Spanish cities in technological research and development. The Parque Cient fico Tecnol gico Cartuja 93 is a nexus of private and public investment in various fields of research.[132]
Principal fields of innovation and research are telecommunications, new technologies, biotechnology (with applications in local agricultural practices), environment and renewable energy.
Transport[edit]
Bus[edit]
Seville is served by the TUSSAM (Transportes Urbanos de Sevilla) bus network which runs buses throughout the city. The Consorcio de Transportes de Sevilla communicates by bus with all the satellite towns of Seville.
Two bus stations serve transportation between surrounding areas and other cities: Plaza de Armas Station, with destinations north and west, and Prado de San Sebasti n Station, covering routes to the south and east. Plaza de Armas station has direct bus lines to many Spanish cities as well as Lisbon, Portugal.
Metro[edit]
The Seville metro ("Metro de Sevilla" in Spanish) is a light metro network serving the city of Seville and its metropolitan area. The system is totally independent of any other rail or street traffic. All stations were built with platform screen doors.
It was the sixth Metro system to be built in Spain, after those in Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, Bilbao and Palma de Mallorca. Currently, it is the fifth-biggest Metro company in Spain by the number of passengers carried (more than 12,000,000 in 2009).[133]
The metro of Sevilla has 1 line with 22 stations and is currently expanding, with 3 more different lines projected.[citation needed]
Tram[edit]
 MetroCentro
MetroCentro is a surface tramway serving the centre of the city. It began operating in October 2007.
The service has just five stops: Plaza Nueva, Archivo de Indias, Puerta de Jerez, Prado de San Sebasti n and San Bernardo, all as part of Phase I of the project. It is expected to be extended to Santa Justa AVE station, including four new stops: San Francisco Javier, Eduardo Dato, Luis de Morales, and Santa Justa. This extension was postponed although the City Council had made expanding the metro lines a priority.[citation needed]
Train[edit]
The Seville-Santa Justa railway station is served by the AVE high-speed rail system, operated by the Spanish state-owned rail company Renfe. A five-line commuter rail service (Cercan as) joins the city with the Metropolitan area. Seville is on the Red Ciudades AVE, a net created with Seville connected to 17 major cities of Spain with high-speed rail.
Although Seville is close to the Portuguese city of Faro, it is not possible to cross the border by train.[134]
Bicycle[edit]
 Sevici Bicycle station
The Sevici community bicycle program has integrated bicycles into the public transport network. Bicycles are available for hire around the city at low cost, and green curb-raised bicycle lanes can be seen on most major streets. The number of people using bicycles as a means of transport in Seville has increased substantially in recent years, multiplying tenfold from 2006 to 2011.[135] As of 2015[update], an estimated 9 percent of all mechanized trips in the city (and 5.6 percent of all trips including those on foot) are made by bicycle.[136]
The city council signed a contract with the multinational corporation JCDecaux, an outdoor advertising company. The public bicycle rental system is financed by a local advertising operator in return for the city signing over a 10-year licence to exploit citywide billboards. The overall scheme is called Cyclocity[137] by JCDecaux, but each city's system is branded under an individual name.
As of 2022, some companies in the e-bike community bicycle program industry such as Lime (transportation company) and Ridemovi started working in the city,[138] thanks to the new parking spots made by the City Council of Seville
Airport[edit]
Main article: San Pablo Airport
 Landing on the San Pablo Airport
The San Pablo Airport is the main airport for Seville and is Andalusia's second busiest airport, after M laga's, and first in cargo. The airport handled 7,544,357 passengers and just under 9,891 tonnes of cargo in 2019.[139] It has one terminal and one runway.
It is one of many bases for the Spanish low-cost carrier Vueling, and from November 2010 Ryanair based aircraft at the airport.[140][needs update] In addition, Ryanair opened its first aircraft maintenance facility in Spain at Seville Airport in 2019.[141]
This enabled low-cost direct flights to several Spanish cities, as well as to the neighbor country of Portugal with weekly flights to Porto[142] and to other European cities.
Port[edit]
Main article: Port of Seville
Seville is the only commercial river port in Spain and the only inland city in the country where cruise ships can arrive in the historical centre. On 21 August 2012, the Muelle de las Delicias, controlled by the Port Authority of Seville, hosted the cruise ship Azamara Journey for two days, the largest ship ever to visit the town. This vessel belongs to the shipping company Royal Caribbean and can accommodate up to 700 passengers.[143]
Roads[edit]
Seville has one ring road, the SE-30, which connects with the dual carriageway of the south, the A-4, that directly communicates the city with C diz, Cordoba and Madrid. Also there is another dual carriageway, the A-92, linking the city with Osuna, Antequera, Granada, Guadix and Almeria. The A-49 links Seville with Huelva and the Algarve in the south of Portugal.
Public transportation statistics[edit]
The average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Sevilla, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 34 min. 7% of public transit riders, ride for more than two hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is eight minutes, while 15% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 5.6 kilometres (3.5 mi), while 7% travel for over 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) in a single direction.[144]
Education[edit]
US' Faculty of CommunicationView of the UPO Campus
Seville is home to three public universities. The University of Seville (US), founded in 1505; as of 2019, it had 72,000 students.[145] The Pablo de Olavide University (UPO), founded in 1997, with 9,152 students in 2019;[146] and the International University of Andalusia (UNIA), founded in 1994.[147]
The US and the UPO are important centres of learning in Western Andalusia as they offer a wide range of academic courses; consequently, the city has a large number of students from Huelva and C diz.
Additionally, there is the School of Hispanic American Studies, founded in 1942, the Men ndez Pelayo International University, based in Santander, which operates branch campuses in Seville, and Loyola University Andalusia.[148]
International primary and secondary schools
Lyc e Fran ais de S ville (French school)
Deutsche Schule Sevilla (German school)
St. George's British School
Seville is also home to many international schools and colleges that cater to American students who come to study abroad.
Sport[edit]
 La Cartuja Stadium
Seville is the hometown of two rival association football teams: Real Betis Balompi  and Sevilla F tbol Club; both teams play in La Liga. Both teams have only won the league once each: Betis in 1935 and Sevilla in 1946.[149] Only Sevilla has won European competitions, winning consecutive UEFA Cup finals in 2006 and 2007[150] and the UEFA Europa League in 2014,[151] 2015, 2016 and 2020. The Ram n S nchez Pizju n and Benito Villamar n, stadiums of Sevilla and Betis respectively, were a venue during the 1982 FIFA World Cup.[152] Also Sevilla's stadium hosted the 1986 European Cup Final[153] and the multi-purpose stadium built in 1999 La Cartuja, was the venue for the 2003 UEFA Cup Final.[154] Seville has an ACB League basketball club, the Real Betis Baloncesto.
Seville has hosted both indoor (1991) and outdoor (1999) World Championships in athletics, while housed the tennis Davis Cup final in 2004 and 2011. The city unsuccessfully bid for the 2004[155] and 2008 Summer Olympics,[156] for which the 60,000-seat Estadio de La Cartuja was designed to stage. Seville's River Guadalquivir is one of only three FISA approved international training centres for rowing and the only one in Spain; the 2002 World Rowing Championships and the 2013 European Rowing Championships were held there.
In fiction[edit]
The picaresque novel Rinconete y Cortadillo by Miguel de Cervantes takes place in the city of Seville.
The novel La Femme et le pantin (The Woman and the Puppet) (1898) by Pierre Lou s, adapted for film several times, is set mainly in Seville.
Seville is the setting for the legend of Don Juan (inspired by the real aristocrat Don Miguel de Ma ara) on the Paseo Alcalde Marqu s de Contadero.
Seville is the primary setting of many operas, the best known of which are Bizet's Carmen (based on M rim e's novella), Rossini's The Barber of Seville, Verdi's La forza del destino, Beethoven's Fidelio, Mozart's Don Giovanni and The Marriage of Figaro, and Prokofiev's Betrothal in a Monastery.
Seville is the setting of the novel The Seville Communion by Arturo P rez-Reverte.
Seville is both the location and setting for much of the 1985 Doctor Who television serial "The Two Doctors".
Seville is also used as one of the locations in Dan Brown's Digital Fortress.
Seville is one of the settings in Jostein Gaarder's book The Orange Girl (Appelsinpiken).
Seville is the hometown of the two main characters in the 2000 film The Road to El Dorado by DreamWorks. Miguel and Tulio are con artists that stow away on a ship bound for the New World and win a map for the fabled lost city of gold, El Dorado, and are invariably seen as gods by the locals.
Arthur Koestler's book Spanish Testament is based on the writer's experiences while held in the Seville prison, under a sentence of death, during the Spanish Civil War.
Robert Wilson's police novel The Hidden Assassins (2006) concerns a terrorist incident in Seville and the political context thereof, with much local colour.
The Plaza de Espa a in the Parque de Mar a Luisa appears in George Lucas' Star Wars: Episode II   Attack of the Clones, in The Dictator, starring Sacha Baron Cohen, as the palace of the dictator Aladeen, and in Lawrence of Arabia as the British Army headquarters in Cairo, while the courtyard was the King Alfonso XIII Hotel.
The Plaza of the Americas also appeared in Lawrence, substituting for Jerusalem, and in Anthony Mann's El Cid. It also appears as the Palace of Vladek Sheybal's Bashaw in The Wind and the Lion (1975).
The Alc zar and other sites appear in the television series Game of Thrones, in the cities of Dorne.
In the 2016 film Assassin's Creed, Master Assassins Aguilar de Nerha and Maria escape execution and are pursued by Templars through the city, eventually performing Leaps of Faith off of an unfinished Seville Cathedral to escape.
In Mission: Impossible 2, Ethan Hunt is sent to Seville to recruit Nyah Nordoff-Hall.
In travel writing[edit]
The Tomb in Seville by Norman Lewis.
Twin towns   sister cities[edit]
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Spain
Seville is twinned with the following cities:
 Angers (France), 1989.[157]
 Barcelona (Spain), 1987.[157][158]
 Buenos Aires (Argentina), 1976.[157][159]
 Columbus, Ohio (United States), 1988.[157][160]
 C rdoba (Spain), 1908.[157]
 Guadalajara (Mexico), 1984.[157]
 Havana (Cuba), 2007.[157][159][161][162]
 Kansas City, Missouri (United States), 1969. The relationship between Seville and Kansas City is due to a small replica of the Giralda tower, Sevilla's cathedral belltower, that exists in Kansas City.[163][164]
 Laredo (Spain), 2017.[165]
 Marrakech (Morocco), 2017.[166]
 Medina de Rioseco (Spain), 2016.[167]
 San Salvador (El Salvador), 2018.[168]
 Sevilla la Nueva (Spain).[157]
Partnerships
 Krak w (Poland), 2002.[169]
Titles[edit]
Seville has been given titles by Spanish monarchs and heads of state throughout its history.[170]
Very Noble, by King Ferdinand III of Castile after his reconquest of the city.
Very Loyal, by King Alfonso X of Castile for supporting him against a rebellion. See also the Motto "NO8DO".
Very Heroic, by King Ferdinand VII of Spain by Royal Document on 13 October 1817 for support against the French invasion.
Invictus (Invincible in Latin), by Queen Isabella II of Spain for the city's resistance against General Van Halen's asedium and bombing in 1843.
Mariana, by General Francisco Franco in 1946 for the city's devotion to the Virgin Mary.
Notable people[edit]
Maria Antonietta of Spain, Queen consort of Sardinia (1729 1785)
Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad, poet and Arabic king of Sevilla 1040 1095
Physician Avenzoar
The family of the Arabic historian and sociologist Ibn Khaldun
13th-century poet Ibn Sahl of Seville
Renaissance composers Crist bal de Morales, Francisco Guerrero
16th-century novelist Mateo Alem n
Playwrights Lope de Rueda and Hermanos Alvarez Quintero
Historian of New Spain Bartolom  de Las Casas
Colonial governor of La Florida and Cuba: Laureano de Torres y Ayala
Colonial governor of La Florida: Pablo de Hita y Salazar
Baroque painters Diego Vel zquez, Vald s Leal and Bartolom  Esteban Murillo
Explorer and astronomer Antonio de Ulloa
Renaissance poets Fernando de Herrera and Gutierre de Cetina
Notable Costumbrista painter who liked to depict the 19th century society of Seville and its buildings Jos  Jim nez Aranda
Romantic poet Gustavo Adolfo B cquer
Bullfighters Juan Belmonte, Curro Romero, Ignacio S nchez Mej as, Emilio Mu oz and Jos  G mez Ortega
Second Spanish Republic Prime Minister Diego Martinez, communist politician Jos  D az and Carlist politician Manuel Fal.
20th-century poets:
Vicente Aleixandre (Nobel Laureate)
Antonio and Manuel Machado
Luis Cernuda
Jose Julio Cabanillas Serrano continuing in the 21st century
Composer Joaqu n Turina
Cartoonist William Haselden
Actors Juan Diego, Paco Le n
Actresses Soledad Miranda, Ver nica S nchez, Carmen Sevilla, Paz Vega, Azucena Hern ndez
Models
Teresa S nchez L pez who won the title of Miss National in the Miss Spain contest 1984 and, representing Spain, was close to the crown of Miss Universe in 1985 (1st runner up).
Eva Maria Gonz lez beauty queen and model who was Miss Espa a 2003 (representing Andalusia)
Singers Isabel Pantoja, Juanita Reina, Lole y Manuel, Paquita Rico, El Caracol, Falete, Pastora Soler, and Mala Rodr guez
Comedian Manuel Summers
Navy officer Miguel Buiza Fern ndez-Palacios who became Captain General of the Spanish Republican Navy
Association footballers Jos  Antonio Reyes, Fernando "Nando" Mu oz, Ricardo Serna, Sergio Ramos, Jes s Navas, Antonio Puerta, Carlos Marchena, Jes s Capit n "Capi", Adri n
Olympic swimmer F tima Madrid
Politicians Felipe Gonz lez, President of the Government of Spain from 1982 to 1996, and Alfonso Guerra, vice-president from 1982 to 1991
Maria Pages, dancer
Jairo Barrull Fern ndez, Spanish Gypsy flamenco dancer
El Risitas, humorist
Criminal Manuel Delgado Villegas, serial killer
Drag queen Carmen Farala, winner of the first season of Drag Race Espa a
Embroiderer Esperanza Elena Caro
See also[edit]
Spain portal
Cadillac Seville, a car that was named after the city
Azulejo
Isla M gica
Seville Public Library
Seville Statement on Violence
References[edit]
^ Demographia: World Urban Areas, 2022
^ Staff (2020). "Seville, Spain". earth.esa.int. ESA Earth Online 2000 - 2020. Archived from the original on 21 March 2020. Retrieved 21 March 2020.
^ Christian-Muslim Relations. A Bibliographical History. Volume 4 (1200 1350). Brill. 2012. p. 9. ISBN 978-90-04-22854-2. Retrieved 7 February 2013.
^ De Coripe a Sevilla por Utrera: formaci n y deformaci n de top nimos en el habla. Diputaci n de Sevilla. 2013. ISBN 978-84-940980-0-0. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ SPAL: Revista de prehistoria y arqueolog a de la Universidad de Sevilla. Secretariado de Publicaciones de la Universidad de Sevilla. 1998. p. 93. Retrieved 8 February 2013. La presencia de fenicios en la antigua Sevilla parece constatada por el top nimo Spal que en diversas lenguas sem ticas significa "zona baja", "llanura verde" o "valle profundo"
^ "La Emergencia de Sevilla". Universidad de Sevilla. Retrieved 11 May 2011.
^ a b c Jos  Mar a de Mena (1992). Art and History of Seville. p. 6. ISBN 978-88-7009-851-8.
^ Echevarria, Ana (2008). Biograf as mud jares, o, La experiencia de ser minor a: biograf as isl micas en la Espa a cristiana. p. 394. ISBN 978-84-00-08744-9.
^ Gerber, Jane S. (1992). The Jews of Spain. p. 31. ISBN 978-1-4391-0783-6.
^ Jos  Mar a de Mena Plaza & Jan s (1985). Historia de Sevilla. p. 47. ISBN 978-84-01-37200-1.
^ Calvert (2018). Southern Spain. p. 17. ISBN 978-3-7340-3692-7.
^ Manrique, Nelson (1993). Vinieron los Sarracenos...: el universo mental de la conquista de Am rica. p. 178. ISBN 978-84-89312-04-3.
^ Glick, Thomas F. (2005). Islamic And Christian Spain in the Early Middle Ages. p. 48. ISBN 90-04-14771-3.
^ Glick, Thomas F. (1979). Islamic and Christian Spain in the Early Middle Ages. p. 323. ISBN 978-0-7837-0098-4.
^ El Gharbi, Jalel (2009). "Thr ne de S ville". Cahiers de la M diterran e (in French) (79): 26 30. doi:10.4000/cdlm.4901.
^ "Leyendas de Sevilla   5 H rcules y la fundaci n de Sevilla". Aznalfarache.blogspot.com. 13 September 2010. Retrieved 29 February 2012.
^ Manuel Jes s Rold n Salgueiro (2007). Historia de Sevilla. Almuzara. ISBN 978-84-88586-24-7. Retrieved 9 February 2013.
^ Jos  Mar a de Mena (1985). Historia de Sevilla. Plaza & Jan s. p. 39. ISBN 978-84-01-37200-1. Retrieved 9 February 2013.
^ "Proyecto Puntual de Investigaci n 1999: Intervenci n Puntual: "Estudios estratigr ficos y an lisis constructivos"". Real Alc zar (in Spanish). Real Alc zar de Sevilla. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2017. Los restos antr picos m s antiguos se situaban sobre esta terraza, bajo la muralla Septentrional del Alc zar, datados en el s. VII-VIII a.C.
^ Elizabeth Nash (16 September 2005). Seville, Cordoba, and Granada : A Cultural History: A Cultural History. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-19-972537-3.
^ "Antiguas Murallas y Puertas de Sevilla". Degelo.com. Retrieved 12 March 2012.
^ a b c Gonz lez Athan , Jos  (2012). "La influencia del r o Guadalquivir en la imagen de la ciudad de Sevilla a lo largo de los siglos" (PDF). Paisajes modelados por el agua: entre el arte y la ingenier a. p. 102. ISBN 978-84-9852-345-4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ Calvo Capilla, Susana (2007). "Las primeras mezquitas de al-Andalus a trav s de las fuentes  rabes (92/711   170/785)". Al-Qan ara. Madrid: Ediciones CSIC. 28 (1): 167. doi:10.3989/alqantara.2007.v28.i1.34.
^ Scheen, Rolf (1996). "Viking raids on the spanish peninsula". Militaria: Revista de Cultura Militar. Madrid: Ediciones Complutense (8): 67. ISSN 0214-8765.
^ Valencia 1994, p. 136 137; 138.
^ Valencia, Rafael (1994). "Islamic Seville: Its Political, Social and Cultural History".  In Jayyusi, Salma Khadra (ed.). The Legacy of Muslim Spain (2nd ed.). Leiden, New York, K ln: EJ Brill. p. 138. ISBN 90-04-09599-3.
^ Garc a Sanju n, Alejandro (2004). "Declive y extinci n de la minor a cristiana en la Sevilla andalus  (ss. XI-XII)" (PDF). Historia. Instituciones. Documentos (31): 271 276. ISSN 0210-7716. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ a b c Valencia 1994, p. 139.
^ Valor Piechotta, Magdalena; Lafuente Ib ez, Pilar (2018). "La Sevilla 'abb d " (PDF).  In Sarr, Bilal (ed.). Tawa'if. Historia y Arqueolog a de los reinos taifas. Granada. p. 182. ISBN 978-84-949380-2-3.
^ El Hour 1999, p. 289.
^ Ram rez del R o, Jos  (1999). "Pueblos de Sevilla en  poca isl mica. Breve recorrido hist rico-pol tico" (PDF). Philologia Hispalensis. 13 (1): 19. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ El Hour, Rachid (1999). "La transici n entre las  pocas almor vide y almohade vista a trav s de las familias de ulemas" (PDF). Estudios onom stico-biogr ficos de al-Andalus, IX. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient ficas. p. 291. ISBN 84-00-07860-8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ Dom nguez Berenjeno, Enrique Luis (2001). "La remodelaci n urbana de Ishbilia a trav s de la historiograf a almohade" (PDF). Actas de las II Jornadas Cordobesas de Arqueolog a Andaluza. C rdoba: UCOPress (12): 178 179. doi:10.21071/aac.v0i.11252 (inactive 31 December 2022).{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of December 2022 (link)
^ Buresi, Pascal (2017). "The story of the Almohads in the Kingdom of Fez and of Morocco". The Soul of Morocco. pp. 105 146.
^ Garc a-Sanjuan, Alejandro (2020). "Box 2.1 Seville".  In Fierro, Maribel (ed.). The Routledge Handbook of Muslim Iberia. Routledge. pp. 23 25. ISBN 978-1-315-62595-9.
^ Ladero Quesada, Miguel  ngel (1987). "Las ciudades de Andaluc a occidental en la Baja Edad Media: sociedad, morfolog a y funciones urbanas". En la Espa a medieval. Madrid: Ediciones Complutense. 10: 74. ISSN 0214-3038.
^ Mott, Lawrence V. (2002). "Iberian Naval Power, 1000 1650" (PDF).  In Hattendorf, John B.; Unger, Richard W. (eds.). War at Sea in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Boydell & Brewer. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-84615-171-2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ Joseph F. O'Callaghan (1975). A History of Medieval Spain. Cornell University Press. p. 353. ISBN 978-0-8014-9264-8. Retrieved 6 February 2013.
^ Garc a Sanju n, Alejandro (2017). "La conquista de Sevilla por Fernando III (646 h/1248). Nuevas propuestas a trav s de la relectura de las fuentes  rabes". Hispania. Revista Espa ola de Historia. Madrid: Editorial CSIC. LXXVII (255): 31 33. doi:10.3989/hispania.2017.001. ISSN 0018-2141.
^ John Julius Norwich (1 April 2001). Great Architecture of the World. Da Capo Press, Incorporated. p. 271. ISBN 978-0-306-81042-8. Retrieved 15 May 2013.
^ Longhurst, john Edward (1 January 1964). "The Age of Torquemada, Chapter 6, pg. 79". Coronado Press. Retrieved 22 August 2021. Description of Dominican friar who agitated for the Spanish Inquisition.
^ MacKay, A. (1972). "Popular Movements and Pogroms in Fifteenth-Century Castile". Past and Present. 55 (1): 33 67. doi:10.1093/past/55.1.33.
^ Levine Melammed, Renee. "Women in Medieval Jewish Societies." Women and Judaism: New Insights and Scholarship. Ed. Frederick E. Greenspahn. New York: New York University Press, 2009. 105 106.
^ P rez-Malla na 1997, p. 15.
^ P rez-Malla na 1997, p. 16.
^ P rez-Malla na, Pablo E. (1997). "Auge y decadencia del puerto de Sevilla como cabecera de las rutas indianas". Caravelle. Cahiers du monde hispanique et luso-br silien. 69: 15 16. doi:10.3406/carav.1997.2753. hdl:11441/101782.
^ "Demograf a de Sevilla en el siglo XVI". Seville University. Retrieved 23 July 2012.
^ Nash, Elizabeth (13 October 2005). Seville, Cordoba, and Granada: A Cultural History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518204-0.
^ "Chapter 15: A History of Spain and Portugal". libro.uca.edu. Retrieved 27 April 2019.
^ "99.06.01: Human-Environment Relations: A Case Study of Donana National Park, Andalucia, Spain and the Los Frailes Mine Toxic Spill of 1998". Yale.edu. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ Casey, James (2002). Early Modern Spain: A Social History. Routledge. pp. 37 38. ISBN 978-1-134-62380-8.
^ "Un campus, una ciudad". Universidad de Sevilla. Archived from the original on 25 March 2014. Retrieved 15 March 2014.
^ Mounielou, Jean Francois (21 February 2017). "Seville and the Opera, a true love affair". Terra Traditions. Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2018.
^ Antig edad del Castillo-Olivares, Mar a Dolores (1990). "El arquitecto Melchor Cano y la teor a de la ciudad. Espacio, Tiempo y Forma". Historia del Arte. VII. Madrid: UNED. 3: 417 439.
^ Santiago Cirugeda;  et al. Collectives Architectures. Vibok Works. ISBN 978-84-939058-2-8. Retrieved 2 February 2013.
^ Crist bal Belda Navarro; Mar a Teresa Mar n Torres (2002). Quince Miradas Sobre Los Museos. Editum. p. 260. ISBN 978-84-8371-311-2. Retrieved 2 February 2013.
^ "La UNIA acoge en Sevilla unas jornadas de arteypensamiento sobre Capital y Territorio". Universidad Internacional de Andaluc a. Archived from the original on 8 January 2014. Retrieved 2 February 2013.
^ Diego A. Cardoso Bueno: Sevilla. El Casco Antiguo. Historia, Arte y Urbanismo. Ediciones Guadalquivir (2006). ISBN 84-8093-154-X. Consultado el 24 March 2010
^ Fern ndez Paradas, Mercedes; La implantaci n del alumbrado p blico de electricidad en la Andaluc a del primer del tercio del S. XX, Universidad de M laga, Espa a [04-09-2012].
^ Henry Robinson Luce (January 1929). "Time". Time. Vol. 13. p. 25. Retrieved 6 February 2013.
^ a b c The Spanish Civil War, Hugh Thomas, Penguin, 1961, pp. 221 223, ISBN 0-14-013593-6
^ Noble, John; Forsyth, Susan; Maric, Vesna (1 January 2007). Lonely Planet Andalucia. ISBN 978-1-74059-973-3. Retrieved 10 April 2011   via Google Books.
^ Stanley G. Payne (2008). Franco and Hitler: Spain, Germany, and World War II. Yale University Press. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-300-12282-4.
^ Wayne H. Bowen (2006). Spain During World War II. University of Missouri Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-8262-6515-9.
^ Marshall Cavendish Corporation (January 2004). History of World War II. Marshall Cavendish. p. 611. ISBN 978-0-7614-7482-1.
^ Christian Pfister; Rudolf Br zdil; R diger Glaser (14 March 2013). Climatic Variability in Sixteenth-Century Europe and Its Social Dimension. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 272. ISBN 978-94-015-9259-8.
^ "Muere Manuel del Valle, el exalcalde de Sevilla que redise  la ciudad". ABC. 27 March 2020. Archived from the original on 14 April 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2020.
^ Rowan Moore. "Metropol Parasol, Seville by J rgen Mayer H   review | Art and design". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 November 2016.
^ barba, eduardo (7 May 2012). "La factura final de las "setas" es de 102 millones, el doble de lo presupuestado". ABC de Sevilla. Retrieved 2 March 2016.
^ "Metropol Parasol Urban Project in Seville". Andalucia.com. 6 December 2011. Retrieved 2 March 2016.
^ M. Kottek; J. Grieser; C. Beck; B. Rudolf; F. Rubel (2006). "World Map of the K ppen-Geiger climate classification updated". Meteorol. Z. 15 (3): 259 263. Bibcode:2006MetZe..15..259K. doi:10.1127/0941-2948/2006/0130. Retrieved 22 April 2009.
^ "Valores climatol gicos normales. Sevilla Aeropuerto". AEMET. Retrieved 3 April 2022.
^ "Europe's hottest spot? Let's have a heated debate". The Independent. 17 August 2001. Retrieved 22 May 2022.
^ Puentes, Carlos (22 August 2018). "La 'sart n' de Espa a: una cuesti n orogr fica con acento cordob s". Cord polis (in Spanish). Retrieved 22 May 2022.
^ Bermejo, Nicol s (9 August 2018). " Por qu  el valle del Guadalquivir es la  sart n  de Espa a?". AEMETblog (in Spanish). Retrieved 22 May 2022.
^ "CartujaQanat   Recovering the Street Life in a Climate Changing World Journal 2: How is Sevilla moving the needle in the fight to urban climate transformation". UIA Initiative. European Union. Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ "Seville, Spain". European Space Agency. 2022. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 3 April 2022.
^ " Cu l es la ciudad m s calurosa de Espa a?". Cadena COPE. 3 July 2021. Retrieved 21 December 2021.
^ "Las ciudades donde hace m s calor de Espa a" (in Spanish). La Sexta. 14 July 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2021.
^ "Sevilla Aeropuerto: Sevilla Aeropuerto - Valores extremos absolutos - Selector - Agencia Estatal de Meteorolog a - AEMET. Gobierno de Espa a". Aemet.es (in Spanish). Retrieved 3 April 2022.
^ "Highest Temperature Extremes". NOAA Satellite and Information Service. Archived from the original on 28 November 2013. Retrieved 29 August 2012.
^ "Bomberos de Sevilla. Alta protecci n y confort bajo condiciones climatol gicas extremas" (PDF). asociacionceat.org (in Spanish). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 3 April 2022.
^ "Sevilla cumple sesenta a os sin ver la nieve en sus calles". ABC. Spain. 2 February 2014.
^ " ltimas 10 nevadas sobre Sevilla". Foro de Tiempo.com. Retrieved 7 October 2018.
^ "Valores climatol gicos normales. Sevilla Aeropuerto". AEMET. Retrieved 21 December 2021.
^ "Valores extremos. Sevilla Aeropuerto". AEMET. Retrieved 21 December 2021.
^ Guaita Mart nez, Jos  Manuel; Mart n Mart n, Jos  Mar a; Salinas Fern ndez, Jose Antonio; Mogorr n-Guerrero, Helena (July 2019). "An analysis of the stability of rural tourism as a desired condition for sustainable tourism". Journal of Business Research. 100: 165 174. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.03.033. S2CID 159374518.
^ The Titi Tudorancea Bulletin. Tourist Attractions in Seville, Spain. Retrieved 24 August 2020.
^ "Metropol Parasol: The World's Largest Wooden Structure Opens in Seville| Inhabitat   Green Design Will Save the World". Inhabitat.com. 24 April 2011. Retrieved 29 February 2012.
^ "Ordenaci n Urbana   Metropol Parasol". Sevilla21.com. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ "Plaza De Espa a And Maria Luisa Park Sevilla   Seville". Sevilla5.com. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ Quintero, Josephine. "The City of Sevilla, the Maria Luisa Park in Sevilla, Andalucia, Spain". Andalucia.com. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ "Ruiz, Hern n. 'Blueprints of Seville's Cathedral and Giralda'". Fidas.es. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ "ABC Hemeroteca". ABC. Spain. Retrieved 12 March 2012.
^ "Buhaira Palace and its Gardens". Turimo de la Provincia - Sevilla. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022.
^ Arnold, Felix (2017). Islamic Palace Architecture in the Western Mediterranean: A History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-062455-2.
^ Historia del Teatro Lope de Vega, Teatro Lope de Vega, archived from the original on 26 October 2011, retrieved 9 December 2008
^ "Seville, Spain". Express Travel World. 12 July 2016   via GaleGroup.
^ "Holy Week in Seville". Tourism of Seville. Accessed 23 May 2020
^ Palma, Mar a Luisa; Palma, Luis; Aguado, Luis Fernando (8 June 2012). "Determinants of cultural and popular celebration attendance: the case study of Seville Spring Fiestas". Journal of Cultural Economics. 37 (1): 87 107. doi:10.1007/s10824-012-9167-5. S2CID 144559604.
^ "Popular festivities in Seville, Spain: Easter Week in Sevilla in Spain". Spain Info US. 23 April 2007.
^ "Itinerario Oficial Semana Santa de Sevilla 2018". Semana-santa.org (in European Spanish).
^ "la Bienal de Flamenco de Sevilla". Labienal.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 10 March 2018.
^ "La vel  de Santiago y Santa Ana en Triana, Sevilla". Visitar Sevilla (in European Spanish). 16 July 2014.
^ Castillo-Manzano, Jos  I.; L pez-Valpuesta, Lourdes; Marchena-G mez, Manuel (February 2015). "Seville: A city with two souls". Cities. 42: 142 151. doi:10.1016/j.cities.2014.10.005.
^ "Feria de Abril, Seville". Exploreseville.com. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ "The first Seville Boat Show arrives in June". barcheamotore.com. 8 April 2019.
^ Garc a-Peinazo, Diego (2019). ""The World's First Flamenco Rock Band"? Anglo-American Progressive Rock, Politics and National Identity in Spain around Carmen's Fandangos in Space". Rock Music Studies. 7: 3. doi:10.1080/19401159.2019.1651533. S2CID 201361699.
^ "Seville: UNESCO City of Music" (PDF). UNESCO. 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 13 February 2018.
^ Latin Grammys to be held in Spain, leaving US for 1st time
^ Ruiz, Ana (2007). Vibrant Andalusia : The spice of life in southern Spain. New York: Algora Publ. ISBN 978-0-87586-539-3.
^ Brown, Joshua (2014). "Flamenco capital: Tradition, revolution and renewal in Seville, Spain". UC Riverside. Retrieved 28 February 2018.
^ Washabaugh, William (2012). Flamenco music and national identity in Spain. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-1-4094-3485-6.
^ Manuel, Peter (1989). "Andalusian, Gypsy, and class identity in the contemporary flamenco complex". Ethnomusicology. 33 (1): 47 65. doi:10.2307/852169. JSTOR 852169. S2CID 191384305.
^ Aoyama, Yuko (March 2009). "Artists, tourists, and the state: Cultural tourism and the flamenco industry in Andalusia, Spain". International Journal of Urban and Regional Research. 33 (1): 80 104. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2427.2009.00846.x. S2CID 144812906.
^ Wright, Fraser (22 January 2016). "A history of Seville Orange Marmalade, including a recipe for making your own". Scotsman Food and Drink. Retrieved 17 June 2020.
^ Padilla, Brenda (3 May 2013). "Gastronomy - Seville Oranges". Andalucia.com. Retrieved 17 June 2020.
^ Elizabeth Nash (2005). Seville, Cordoba, and Granada:A Cultural History: A Cultural History. Oxford University Press. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-19-518204-0. Retrieved 8 February 2013.
^ Burgen, Stephen (23 February 2021). "'A role model': how Seville is turning leftover oranges into electricity". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 24 February 2021.
^ a b "Sevilla aporta la cuarta parte del PIB y es la capital econ mica de Andaluc a". ABC de Sevilla. 20 February 2005. Archived from the original on 13 February 2013.
^ "Rodr guez Villalobos afirma que los peque os municipios necesitan una figura supramunicipal para poder prestar servicios p blicos". Diputaci n de Sevilla. Archived from the original on 6 July 2012. Retrieved 24 July 2012.
^ "Atlas de la provincia de Sevilla". Map:Innovaci n tecnol gica. Diputaci n de Sevilla, Junta de Andaluc a. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013.
^ "Atlas de la provincia de Sevilla". Map:Empleo en el sector terciario. Diputaci n de Sevilla, Junta de Andaluc a. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013.
^ "Atlas de la provincia de Sevilla" (PDF). Map:Industrial actividad. Diputaci n de Sevilla, Junta de Andaluc a. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2012.
^ "Autoridad Portuaria de Sevilla". Portal.apsevilla.com (in Spanish). 1 January 1980. Archived from the original on 25 November 2016. Retrieved 24 November 2016.
^ "PCTCartuja   Inicio". Cartuja93.es. Retrieved 24 November 2016.
^ "Aer polis   Inicio". aeropolis.es. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ Guadalupe Trigueros Gordillo (1998). La Universidad de Sevilla Durante El Sexenio Revolucionario. Universidad de Sevilla. p. 96. ISBN 978-84-472-0417-5. Retrieved 8 February 2013.
^ Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology News: GEN. GEN Pub. 2007. p. 15. Retrieved 8 February 2013.
^ "Planta Solar 10". Concentrating Solar Power Projects. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), U.S. Dept. of Energy (DOE). 21 April 2009. Retrieved 20 March 2012.
^ Marchese, Marco; Jonathan Potter (2011). "Entrepreneurship, SMEs and Local Development in Andalusia, Spain. No. 2011/3. LEED Working Paper Series, LEED programme" (PDF). OECD Publishing. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "...others in the region are rather sector-oriented (e.g. Seville's Aer polis specialised in the aeronautics industry or Granada's based on health sciences.) {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Francisco Javier Moncl s; Francisco Javier Moncl s Fraga (2006). Exposiciones internacionales y urbanismo: El proyecto Expo Zaragoza 2008. Univ. Polit c. de Catalunya. p. 106. ISBN 978-8483018934. Retrieved 6 February 2013.
^ Jesse, Russell. List of Seville Metro Stations. Book on Demand Pod.
^ "Is there any train from Seville to Faro, Portugal?", Travelinho.com
^ "Seville goes Dutch". London Cycling Campaign. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 22 May 2014.
^ "Research on the use of bicycles in the city of Seville, 2013". SIBUS. Retrieved 22 May 2014.
^ "The self-service bicycle sheme by JCDecaux". JCDecaux. 20 December 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2013.
^ "Sevilla estrena un servicio de alquiler de 2.000 bicicletas el ctricas por toda la ciudad". Diario de Sevilla.
^ "AENA   airport statistics". Aena.es. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Ryanair anuncia su base n mero 44 en Sevilla". Ryanair.com. 23 July 2010.
^ "Ryanair opens its first MRO facility in Spain at Seville Airport". centreforaviation.com. 17 October 2019.
^ "Lisbon to Seville via Porto". Travelinho.com.
^ El Puerto de Sevilla acoger  el mayor crucero de su historia Archived 19 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine Tuttocruceros.com 25 June 2012
^ "Sevilla Public Transportation Statistics". Global Public Transit Index by Moovit. Retrieved 19 June 2017.  Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
^ "Universidad de Sevilla". Mejores universidades 2019. El Mundo. 9 May 2019.
^ "Universidad Pablo de Olavide". Mejores universidades 2019. El Mundo. 9 May 2019.
^ "Inicio". Unia.es. 21 October 2016. Retrieved 24 November 2016.
^ "Inicio en Sede de Sevilla". Uimp.es. 22 March 2011. Archived from the original on 15 March 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ "La Liga Champions". Topendsports.com. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ "Uefa Cup". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. 31 May 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ "Sevilla win Europa final after penalties". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 15 May 2014.
^ Jan Alsos. "1982   Match Schedule". Planet World Cup. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ "1986 European Cup Final : FC Barcelona v Steaua Bucharest   Complete Game Film | BETWEEN THE STICKS   ZWISCHEN DEN STOECKEN : Weil Jemand Es Tun Muss". Lvironpigs.wordpress.com. 19 December 2010. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ "Porto end Celtic's Uefa dream". BBC News. 21 May 2003. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ Wilkins, Luke (11 January 1996). "Olympic Games: 11 cities bid to stage 2004 Games   Sport". The Independent. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ "CNN/SI   Olympics   Seville seeking 2008 Olympic bid   Wednesday May 05, 1999 12:37 pm". Sports Illustrated. 5 May 1999. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ a b c d e f g h Montero, Roc o (22 April 2018). "Las 18 ciudades del mundo que est n hermanadas con Sevilla". ABC.
^ "Noticias   Sevilla Y Barcelona Colaborar n Estrechamente Para Difundir Los Valores Del F rum". Noticias.info. Archived from the original on 6 June 2004. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ a b Hermanamientos con Latinoam rica Archived 13 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (102,91 kB). [29-9-2008]
^ "Columbus   Sister Cities". Columbus Sister Cities International, Inc. Retrieved 4 August 2013.
^ "Nos Visit  El Poder Popular De Ciudad De La Habana " Comit  Local Pca-Sevilla". Pcasevilla.wordpress.com. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2011.
^ "Sister Cities, Public Relations". Guadalajara municipal government. Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ "Kansas City   Sister Cities". Sister City Association of Kansas City, MO. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 4 August 2013.
^ "Seville, Spain   Kansas City Sister Cities". Kcsistercities.org. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2012.
^ Ybarra, Pedro (13 October 2017). "Sevilla y Laredo firman su acuerdo de hermanamiento con vocaci n de cooperaci n mutua". ABC.
^ "Marrakech y Sevilla sellan su hermanamiento para estrechar "relaciones de amistad y de cooperaci n"". Europa Press. 5 April 2017.
^ M.G.M (4 October 2016). "Rioseco oficializa su hermanamiento con Sevilla". El Norte de Castilla.
^ "Sevilla y San Salvador sellan su hermanamiento y se abren a cooperaci n econ mica, social, cultural y cient fica". Europa Press. 1 November 2018.
^ "Krak w otwarty na  wiat". Krakow.pl. Retrieved 19 July 2009.
^ "De los t tulos de la Ciudad de Sevilla". Degelo.com.
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1854 1857). "Seville". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography. London: John Murray.
External links[edit]
Seville  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsData from Wikidata
Seville in the official website of Tourism in Spain
Official website of the city council. (in Spanish)
Postal Codes in Seville (in Spanish)
Articles related to Seville
vteWorld Heritage Sites in SpainFor official site names, see each article or the List of World Heritage Sites in Spain.North West
Caves of Altamira and Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain1
Monuments of Oviedo and the Kingdom of the Asturias
Roman walls of Lugo
Route of Santiago de Compostela1
Santiago de Compostela (Old Town)
Tower of Hercules
North East
Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests5
Caves of Altamira and Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain1
Mud jar Architecture of Aragon
Pirineos - Monte Perdido2
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1
Route of Santiago de Compostela1
San Mill n Yuso and Suso Monasteries
Vizcaya Bridge
Centre
Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests5
Aranjuez Cultural Landscape
Archaeological Ensemble of M rida
Archaeological Site of Atapuerca
Old Town of  vila with its Extra-mural Churches
Burgos Cathedral
Old Town of C ceres
Historic Walled Town of Cuenca
Monastery and Site of El Escorial
Heritage of Mercury. Almad n and Idrija3
Las M dulas
Monastery of Saint Mary of Guadalupe
Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro, a landscape of Arts and Sciences
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1
Route of Santiago de Compostela1
Old City of Salamanca
Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct
Prehistoric Rock Art Sites in the C a Valley and Siega Verde4
Historic City of Toledo
University and Historic Precinct of Alcal  de Henares
East
Archaeological Ensemble of Tarraco, Tarragona
Catalan Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Bo 
Palau de la M sica Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona
Palmeral of Elche
Poblet Abbey
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1
Silk Exchange in Valencia
Works of Antoni Gaud 
South
Alhambra, Generalife and Albaic n, Granada
Cathedral, Alc zar and General Archive of the Indies, Seville
Dolmens Site of Antequera
Do ana National Park
Historic Centre of C rdoba
Madinat al-Zahra
Renaissance Monuments of  beda and Baeza
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1
Balearic Islands
Cultural Landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana
Ibiza, Biodiversity and Culture
Canary Islands
Garajonay
Risco Ca do and the Sacred Mountains
San Crist bal de La Laguna
Teide National Park
1 Shared with other region/s
2 Shared with France
3 Shared with Slovenia
4 Shared with Portugal
5 Shared with Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland and Ukraine
vteDemolished landmarks in SevilleBuildings
Castle of San Jorge
Palacio de S nchez Dalp
Palacio del Marqu s de Palomares
Gran Caf  de Par s
Triumphal arches for the arrival of Isabel II
Instituto de Higiene del Doctor Murga
Gate walls
Puerta de Jerez
Puerta del Arenal
Puerta de Triana
Puerta Real
Puerta de San Juan
Puerta de la Almenilla
Puerta del Sol
Puerta Osario
Puerta de San Fernando
Partially demolished
Ca os de Carmona
Other
List of missing landmarks in Spain
vteHost cities of the World Athletics Championships
1983: Helsinki
1987: Rome
1991: Tokyo
1993: Stuttgart
1995: Gothenburg
1997: Athens
1999: Seville
2001: Edmonton
2003: Saint-Denis
2005: Helsinki
2007: Osaka
2009: Berlin
2011: Daegu
2013: Moscow
2015: Beijing
2017: London
2019: Doha
2022: Eugene
2023: Budapest
2025: Tokyo
vteCities in Spain by population1,000,000+
Madrid
Barcelona
500,000 - 999,999
Valencia
Seville
Zaragoza
M laga
300,000 - 499,999
Murcia
Palma
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Bilbao
Alicante
Cordoba
200,000 - 299,999
Valladolid
Vigo
Gij n
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat
A Coru a
Vitoria-Gasteiz
Granada
Elche
Oviedo
Badalona
Cartagena
Terrassa
Jerez de la Frontera
Sabadell
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
M stoles
Alcal  de Henares
100,000 - 199,999
Pamplona
Fuenlabrada
Almer a
Legan s
San Sebasti n
Burgos
Santander
Castell n de la Plana
Getafe
Albacete
Alcorc n
Logro o
San Crist bal de La Laguna
Badajoz
Salamanca
Huelva
Lleida
Marbella
Tarragona
Le n
C diz
Lleida
Dos Hermanas
Tarragona
Torrej n de Ardoz
Parla
Matar 
Algeciras
Santa Coloma de Gramenet
Alcobendas
Ja n
Ourense
Reus
Barakaldo
Girona
75,000 - 99,999
Lugo
Roquetas de Mar
Santiago de Compostela
C ceres
Las Rozas de Madrid
Lorca
San Fernando
El Puerto de Santa Mar a
Guadalajara
Melilla
Toledo
Torrevieja
Ceuta
Talavera de la Reina
Pontevedra
Orihuela
Palencia
Avil s
Alcal  de Guada ra
Ciudad Real
Complete list
vteCapitals of provinces of Spain
A Coru a
Albacete
Alicante
Almer a
 vila
Badajoz
Barcelona
Bilbao
Burgos
C ceres
C diz
Castell n de la Plana
Ciudad Real
C rdoba
Cuenca
Girona
Granada
Guadalajara
Huelva
Huesca
Ja n
Logro o
Las Palmas
Le n
Lleida
Lugo
Madrid
M laga
Murcia
Ourense
Oviedo
Palencia
Palma de Mallorca
Pamplona
Pontevedra
Salamanca
San Sebasti n
Santander
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
Segovia
Seville
Soria
Tarragona
Teruel
Toledo
Valencia
Valladolid
Vitoria-Gasteiz
Zamora
Zaragoza
vteCapitals of autonomous communities of Spain
Seville
Andalusia
Zaragoza
Aragon
Oviedo
Asturias
Palma
Balearic Islands
Vitoria-Gasteiz
Basque Country
Santa Cruz and Las Palmas
Canary Islands
Santander
Cantabria
Toledo
Castilla La Mancha
Valladolid
de facto, Castile and Le n
Barcelona
Catalonia
M rida
Extremadura
Santiago de Compostela
Galicia
Logro o
La Rioja
Madrid
Community of Madrid
Murcia
Region of Murcia
Pamplona
Navarre
Valencia
Valencian Community
Ceuta1
Melilla1
1 Autonomous cities
vteCapitals of European states and territoriesCapitals of dependent territories and states whose sovereignty is disputed shown in italics.Sovereign states
Amsterdam, Netherlands1
Andorra la Vella, Andorra
Ankara, Turkey3
Astana, Kazakhstan3
Athens, Greece
Baku, Azerbaijan3
Belgrade, Serbia
Berlin, Germany
Bern, Switzerland
Bratislava, Slovakia
Brussels, Belgium2
Bucharest, Romania
Budapest, Hungary
Chi in u, Moldova
Copenhagen, Denmark
Dublin, Ireland
Helsinki, Finland
Kyiv, Ukraine
Lisbon, Portugal
Ljubljana, Slovenia
London, United Kingdom
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Madrid, Spain
Minsk, Belarus
Monaco5
Moscow, Russia
Nicosia, Cyprus3
Oslo, Norway
Paris, France
Podgorica, Montenegro
Prague, Czech Republic
Reykjav k, Iceland
Riga, Latvia
Rome, Italy
San Marino, San Marino
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Skopje, North Macedonia
Sofia, Bulgaria
Stockholm, Sweden
Tallinn, Estonia
Tbilisi, Georgia3
Tirana, Albania
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Valletta, Malta
Vatican City5
Vienna, Austria
Vilnius, Lithuania
Warsaw, Poland
Yerevan, Armenia3
Zagreb, Croatia
States withlimited recognition
North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus3
Pristina, Kosovo
Stepanakert, Republic of Artsakh3
Sukhumi, Abkhazia3
Tiraspol, Transnistria
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia3
DependenciesUnited KingdomConstituent countries
London, England
Edinburgh, Scotland
Cardiff, Wales
Belfast, Northern Ireland
Crown Dependencies andOverseas Territories
Douglas, Isle of Man
Episkopi Cantonment, Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Gibraltar, Gibraltar
St Helier, Jersey
Saint Peter Port, Guernsey
Other
Longyearbyen, Svalbard (Norway)
T rshavn, Faroe Islands (Denmark)
Federal statesAustria
Bregenz, Vorarlberg
Eisenstadt, Burgenland
Graz, Styria
Innsbruck, Tyrol
Klagenfurt, Carinthia
Linz, Upper Austria
Salzburg, Salzburg
Sankt P lten, Lower Austria
Vienna, Vienna
BelgiumCommunities
Brussels, Flemish Community and French Community
Eupen, German-speaking Community
Regions
Brussels, Brussels-Capital Region and Flanders
Namur, Wallonia
Germany
Bremen, Bremen
Dresden, Saxony
D sseldorf, North Rhine-Westphalia
Erfurt, Thuringia
Hamburg, Hamburg
Hanover, Lower Saxony
Kiel, Schleswig-Holstein
Magdeburg, Saxony-Anhalt
Mainz, Rhineland-Palatinate
Munich, Bavaria
Potsdam, Brandenburg
Saarbr cken, Saarland
Schwerin, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
Stuttgart, Baden-W rttemberg
Wiesbaden, Hesse
RussiaRepublics
Cheboksary, Chuvashia
Cherkessk, Karachay-Cherkessia
Elista, Kalmykia
Grozny, Chechnya
Izhevsk, Udmurtia
Kazan, Tatarstan
Magas, Ingushetia
Makhachkala, Dagestan
Maykop, Adygea
Nalchik, Kabardino-Balkaria
Petrozavodsk, Karelia
Saransk, Mordovia
Simferopol, Crimea (disputed)
Syktyvkar, Komi
Yoshkar-Ola, Mari El
Ufa, Bashkortostan
Vladikavkaz, North Ossetia Alania
Federal cities
Moscow, Moscow
Saint Petersburg, Saint Petersburg
Sevastopol, Sevastopol (disputed)
Switzerland
Aarau, Aargau
Altdorf, Uri
Appenzell, Appenzell Innerrhoden
Basel, Basel-Stadt
Bellinzona, Ticino
Chur, Grisons
Del mont, Jura
Frauenfeld, Thurgau
Fribourg, Canton of Fribourg
Geneva, Canton of Geneva
Herisau, Appenzell Ausserrhoden
Lausanne, Vaud
Liestal, Basel-Landschaft
Lucerne, Canton of Lucerne
Neuch tel, Canton of Neuch tel
Sarnen, Obwalden
Schaffhausen, Canton of Schaffhausen
Schwyz, Canton of Schwyz
Sion, Valais
Solothurn, Canton of Solothurn
Stans, Nidwalden
St. Gallen, Canton of St. Gallen
Glarus, Canton of Glarus
Zug, Canton of Zug
Z rich, Z rich Canton
AutonomousentitiesItalyAutonomous regions
Cagliari, Sardinia
Palermo, Sicily
Trento, Trentino-Alto Adige/S dtirol
Aosta, Aosta Valley
Trieste, Friuli Venezia Giulia
SpainAutonomouscommunities
Barcelona, Catalonia
Las Palmas & Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands
Logro o, La Rioja
M rida, Extremadura
Murcia, Murcia
Oviedo, Asturias
Palma de Mallorca, Balearic Islands
Pamplona, Navarre
Santander, Cantabria
Santiago de Compostela, Galicia
Seville, Andalusia
Toledo, Castilla La Mancha (de facto)
Valencia, Valencia
Valladolid, Castile and Le n (de facto)
Vitoria-Gasteiz, Basque Country (de facto)
Zaragoza, Aragon
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Banja Luka (de facto), Republika Srpska
Br ko, Br ko District
Sarajevo, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Other
Ajaccio, Corsica Collectivit (France)
Batumi, Adjara (Georgia)
Comrat, Gagauzia (Moldova)
Karyes, Mount Athos (Greece)
Mariehamn, land Islands (Finland)
Nakhchivan, Nakhchivan (Azerbaijan)
Novi Sad, Vojvodina (Serbia)
Simferopol, Crimea (Ukraine)
1 Also the capital of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
2 Also the seat of the European Union, see Institutional seats of the European Union and Brussels and the European Union
3 Continental placement may vary depending on geographic convention being followed
5 A city-state
Authority control International
ISNI
VIAF
2
WorldCat
2
National
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Sweden
Czech Republic
Geographic
MusicBrainz area
Other
NARA
 sl m Ansiklopedisi
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seville&oldid=1148484654"