Bread made with potato and flour
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Potato bread" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Potato breadPotato breadTypeBreadMain ingredientsPotato, flour, wheat flour  Media: Potato bread
 Potato bread with butter
Potato bread is a form of bread in which potato flour or potato replaces a portion of the regular wheat flour.[1][2] It is cooked in a variety of ways, including baking it on a hot griddle or pan, or in an oven. It may be leavened or unleavened, and may have a variety of other ingredients baked into it. The ratio of potato to wheat flour varies significantly from recipe to recipe, with some recipes having a majority of potato, and others having a majority of wheat flour. Some recipes call for mashed potatoes, with others calling for dehydrated potato flakes. It is available as a commercial product in many countries, with similar variations in ingredients, cooking method, and other variables.
Alternative names[edit]
Potato bread goes by many regional names, including slims, fadge, potato cake, potato farls, and tatie bread in Ireland. "Potato cake" can actually refer to numerous dishes.
Varieties[edit]
Brazil[edit]
Brazilian potato bread is usually a light airy bread, made in small round loaves with potatoes or potato flour mixed with wheat flour, milk, eggs and yeast and then baked. It can also be found with Catupiry filling and is usually consumed as a snack all over the country.
Chile[edit]
Potato bread, in different forms, is a common element of the cuisine of Chilo  in Southern Chile. The most popular breads are milcao and chapalele, which are part of the traditional curanto.
Germany[edit]
Kartoffelbrot is a potato bread that may contain spelt and rye flour.
Berches is a German-Jewish bread made for Shabbat. Like other Ashkenazi challot, it is typically braided, but unlike the sweet, eggy challah of eastern Ashkenazi cuisine, berches bread contains boiled, mashed, and cooled potato, and has no egg and very little sugar in the dough. Some recipes contain oil, and some do not. It is often topped with an egg wash (even if there is no egg incorporated into the dough itself), and poppy seeds. While there are few German Jews left living in Germany, the tradition of making berches has been carried on by non-Jewish bakers, who are aware of the bread's Jewish history.[3]
Hungary[edit]
Potato bread is a part of the cuisine of Hungary.[4]
Northern Ireland and Republic of Ireland[edit]
 Potato cakes/bread commonly forms part of an Ulster fry
 Soda farl
On the island of Ireland, potato bread or cakes known as boxty (Irish: bacsta ) were popular, and may have been a result of the floury types of potatoes that were common in the country.[5]
Potato farls are one large round divided into four quadrants or square slices (usually around 0.5 1 cm in thickness) of soft potato bread, lightly powdered with flour and are common in Ulster, especially Northern Ireland. They are traditionally used as one of the distinguishing items of food in an Ulster fry, where they are shallow-fried on both sides for a short time and served with soda farls cooked in the same way. They can also be grilled and buttered, or eaten with a variety of toppings.[6]
Apple potato cake or "fadge" was cooked in Ireland in autumn, when cooking apples were available, and very popular in the north-east of the country. Freshly cooked potatoes are mixed with melted butter, salt, and flour.[5] It is a potato bread wrapped, pastry-like, around a sweet filling of apples.[6]
Poland[edit]
Okr g y chleb kartoflany is a light and airy potato bread.[7]
Scotland[edit]
The Scottish tattie scone, also known as a "tottie scone" or "potato scone", is similar to the Irish potato farl. They are generally shaped as one large round divided into four quadrants, in a similar fashion to traditional Scottish oatcakes, or as small rounds.
United States[edit]
Potato bread is commercially available in the United States as a light and airy bread very similar to normal mass-produced white bread, but with a yellow tint, thicker texture, and a light potato flavor.
Cherokee sweet potato bread is a variation on potato bread that uses sweet potatoes.[citation needed]
See also[edit]
Food portal
List of breads
List of Irish dishes
List of potato dishes
Potato pancake
References[edit]
^ Mu, T.; Sun, H.; Liu, X. (2016). Potato Staple Food Processing Technology. SpringerBriefs in Food, Health, and Nutrition. Springer Singapore. p. 9. ISBN 978-981-10-2833-5. Retrieved January 9, 2017.
^ Hensperger, B. (2000). Bread Lover's Bread Machine Cookbook: A Master Baker's 300 Favorite Recipes for Perfect-Every-Time Bread-From Every Kind of Machine. Harvard Common Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-1-55832-156-4. Retrieved January 9, 2017.
^ Gropman, Sonya (June 2018). "A Jewish Bread Lives On in Germany". TASTE. Retrieved 9 May 2020.
^ Treuille, E.; Ferrigno, U. (2004). Ultimate Bread. DK Pub. p. 103. ISBN 978-0-7566-0370-0.
^ a b Mahon, Br d (1998). Land of milk and honey : the story of traditional Irish food and drink. Dublin [Ireland]: Mercier Press. p. 139. ISBN 1-85635-210-2. OCLC 39935389.
^ a b Hickey, Margaret (2018). Ireland's green larder : the definitive history of Irish food and drink ([Paperback edition] ed.). London: Unbound. pp. 65, 248. ISBN 978-1-78352-799-1. OCLC 1085196202.
^ Dooley, B. (2015). In Winter's Kitchen. Milkweed Editions. pp. 60 61. ISBN 978-1-57131-881-7. Retrieved January 9, 2017.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Potato breads.
A common Irish recipe in Wikibooks
Ireland's eye -potato bread recipe
vtePotato dishesBaked or roasted
Baeckeoffe
Baked potato
Fondant potatoes
Funeral potatoes
Gratin dauphinois
Hasselback potatoes
Jansson's temptation
Knish
Kouign patatez
Kugel
Kugelis
Lancashire hotpot
Panackelty
P t  aux pommes de terre
Pommes Anna
Pommes boulang re
Potato babka
Potato scone
Potato skins
Potato waffle
Potatoes au gratin
Rappie pie
Rumbledethumps
Sweetened potato casserole
Tartiflette
Yapchik
Boiled or stewed
Aloo gosht
Aloo tikki
 lplermagronen
Bryndzov  halu ky
Carapulcra
Cepelinai
Coddle
Kroppkaka
Lobscouse
Nikujaga
Ocopa
Papa a la Huanca na
Papas arrugadas
Papas chorreadas
Papet Vaudois
Pitepalt
Poutine r p e
Raclette
Raspeball
Salt potatoes
Selat solo
Stovies
Szilv sgomb c
FriedFrench fries
Cheese fries
Carne asada fries
Kapsalon
Poutine
Chorrillana
Curly fries
Halal snack pack
Lomo saltado
Potato wedges
French fry sandwiches and wraps
California burrito
Chip butty
French tacos
Mitraillette
Salchipapa
Spice bag
Triple-cooked chips
Other deep-fried
Kripik kentang
Papa rellena
Pommes souffl es
Potato chips
Crisp sandwich
Potato doughnut
Potato fritters
Batata vada
Bonda
Perkedel
Pommes dauphine
Vada
Vada pav
Tater tots
Tornado potato
Pan- or griddle-fried
Bubble and squeak
German fries
Hash browns
Home fries
Lyonnaise potatoes
Maluns
Patatas bravas
Potatoes O'Brien
Potato pancakes
Boxty
Gamja-jeon
Latke
Llapingacho
Patatnik
Reibekuchen
Pyttipanna
R sti
Spanish omelette
Trinxat
Truffade
Other or mixed
Aloo pie
Aloo chaat
Aloo gobi
Batata harra
P la
Samosa
Mashed
Aligot
Bangers and mash
Brandade
Br ndende k rlighed
Champ
Clapshot
Colcannon
Cottage pie
Croquette
Duchess potatoes
Hachis Parmentier
Himmel und Erde
Hutspot
Mashed potato
Mince and tatties
Ragda pattice
Skomakarl da
Stamppot
Stoemp
Salads
Olivier salad
Potato salad
Sza ot
Soups
Ajiaco
Gamja-ongsimi
Gamja-tang
Sayur sop
Other
Chu o
Gnocchi
Homity pie
Kartoffelk se
Lefse
Munini-imo
Potato bread
Potato cake
Potatonik
Rewena bread
Tombet
Wrap roti
vteIrish breads
Barmbrack
Belfast bap
Blaa
Brown bread
Farl
Fried bread
Potato bread
Soda bread
Veda bread
 Recipes on WikiBooks
 Category:Irish breads
  Food portal
 The Ireland Portal
 The Northern Ireland Portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Potato_bread&oldid=1145176333"