North American time zone
"Pacific Time" redirects here. For the radio show, see Pacific Time (radio show).
"Pacific Standard Time" redirects here. For the art exhibition, see Pacific Standard Time: Art in L.A., 1945 1980.
"PT time" redirects here. For the blood test, see Prothrombin time.
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Pacific Time Zone" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Pacific Time ZoneTime zone Pacific Time ZoneUTC offsetPSTUTC 08:00PDTUTC 07:00Current time05:55, 14 April 2023 PST [refresh]06:55, 14 April 2023 PDT [refresh]Observance of DSTDST is observed throughout this time zone.
The Pacific Time Zone (PT) is a time zone encompassing parts of western Canada, the western United States, and western Mexico. Places in this zone observe standard time by subtracting eight hours from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC 08:00). During daylight saving time, a time offset of UTC 07:00 is used.
In the United States and Canada, this time zone is generically called the Pacific Time Zone. Specifically, time in this zone is referred to as Pacific Standard Time (PST) when standard time is being observed (early November to mid-March), and Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) when daylight saving time (mid-March to early November) is being observed. In Mexico, the corresponding time zone is known as the Zona Noroeste (Northwest Zone) and observes the same daylight saving schedule as the U.S. and Canada. The largest city in the Pacific Time Zone is Los Angeles, whose metropolitan area is also the largest in the time zone.
The zone is two hours ahead of the Hawaii Aleutian Time Zone, one hour ahead of the Alaska Time Zone, one hour behind the Mountain Time Zone,[a] two hours behind the Central Time Zone, three hours behind the Eastern Time Zone, and four hours behind the Atlantic Time Zone.
Canada[edit]
Main article: Time in Canada
One Canadian province is split between the Pacific Time Zone and the Mountain Time Zone:
British Columbia   all, except for the Highway 95 corridor (including Golden and Creston) in the southeast, and Tumbler Ridge, Fort St. John, and Dawson Creek in the northeast
As of September 24, 2020, Yukon officially switched from the Pacific Time Zone to a time zone "to be reckoned as seven hours behind Coordinated Universal Time (UTC 7)" after deciding to stop observing daylight saving time.[1]
Mexico[edit]
Main article: Time in Mexico
In Mexico, the Zona Noroeste, which corresponds to Pacific Time in the United States and Canada, includes:
Baja California
United States[edit]
Main article: Time in the United States
Two states are fully contained in the Pacific Time Zone:
California
Washington
Three states are split between the Pacific Time Zone and the Mountain Time Zone:
Idaho   Idaho Panhandle
Nevada   all, except for West Wendover and, unofficially, several towns along the Idaho border
Oregon   all, except for the majority of Malheur County
One state is split between the Pacific Time Zone (unofficially), the Alaska Time Zone, and the Hawaii Aleutian Time Zone:
Alaska   Hyder
Daylight time[edit]
Through 2006, the local time (PST, UTC 08:00) changed to daylight time (PDT, UTC 07:00) at 02:00 LST (local standard time) to 03:00 LDT (local daylight time) on the first Sunday in April, and returned at 02:00 LDT to 01:00 LST on the last Sunday in October.
Effective in the U.S. in 2007 as a result of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, the local time changes from PST to PDT at 02:00 LST to 03:00 LDT on the second Sunday in March and the time returns at 02:00 LDT to 01:00 LST on the first Sunday in November. The Canadian provinces and territories that use daylight time each adopted these dates between October 2005 and February 2007. In Mexico, beginning in 2010, the portion of the country in this time zone uses the extended dates, as do some other parts. The vast majority of Mexico, however, still uses the old dates.
See also[edit]
Effects of time zones on North American broadcasting
Notes[edit]
^ While the state of Arizona lies entirely within the Mountain Time Zone, daylight saving time is only observed within the Navajo Nation; as a result, Arizona is aligned with the Pacific Time Zone from mid-March to early November.
References[edit]
^ Howells, Laura (29 September 2020). "How do you stop a time change? In Yukon, it's taken time". CBC News. Retrieved 2 October 2021.
External links[edit]
The Official NIST US Time
Official times across Canada
U.S. time zone map
History of U.S. time zones and UTC conversion Archived 8 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine
Canada time zone map
Time zones for major world cities
vteTime zones in North America
Time zone
Hours from UTC: Standard time
Hours from UTC: Daylight saving time
Hawaii Aleutian (in Hawaii)
 10
 10
Hawaii Aleutian (parts of Alaska)
 10
 9
Alaska
 9
 8
Pacific (parts of Alaska)
 8
 8
Pacific (other states/provinces)
 8
 7
Mountain (Arizona, Sonora, Yukon, and Northeastern British Columbia only)
 7
 7
Mountain (other states/provinces)
 7
 6
Saskatchewan
 6
 6
Central (other states/provinces)
 6
 5
Eastern (parts of Nunavut, Ontario, and the Caribbean)
 5
 5
Eastern (other states/provinces)
 5
 4
Atlantic (Natashquan River)
 4
 4
Atlantic (other provinces)
 4
 3
Newfoundland
 3:30
 2:30
Saint Pierre and Miquelonand most of Greenland
 3
 2
See also
Time in Canada
Time in the Danish Realm
Time in Mexico
Time in the United States
Authority control International
WorldCat
National
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pacific_Time_Zone&oldid=1147236104"